Pradyumna: (leads chanting of verse) (Prabhup■da and devotees repeat)
(break)
atra—here; ■■r■■—heroes; mahe■v■s■■—mighty bowmen; bh■ma-arjuna—Bh■ma and Arjuna;
sam■■—equal; yudhi—in the fight; yuyudh■na■—Yuyudh■na; vir■■a■—Vir■■a; ca—also;
drupada■—Drupada; ca—also; mah■ratha■—great fighter.
Translation: "Here in this army there are many heroic bowmen equal in fighting to Bh■ma and Arjuna;
there are also great fighters like Yuyudh■na, Vir■■a and Drupada."
Prabhup■da: Hmm. So all these heroes are mentioned not only in this verse, in several other verses
also. So people may ask that "By mentioning these great fighter, what spiritual progress we make?
Because we are meant for chanting Hare K■■■a mah■-mantra, so by chanting the names of these
great fighters, what do we gain?" The question may be raised there. But the thing is that nirbandha■
k■■■a-sambandhe: whenever there is connection with K■■■a, that also becomes K■■■a.
This is a subtle form of philosophical understanding. Nirbandha■ k■■■a-sambandhe. If there is
relationship with K■■■a . . . therefore the sahajiy■s, they do not read Bhagavad-g■t■. They say, "We
have nothing to do with Bhagavad-g■t■." They jump over to the ■r■mad-Bh■gavatam, Tenth Canto,
K■■■a's r■sa-l■l■, as if K■■■a is connected with r■sa-l■l■ and not with this l■l■. They make
distinction. K■■■a's this fighting l■l■, pastimes, and the r■sa-l■l■ pastime, they are all the same,
because K■■■a is the center. K■■■a being center, whatever in connection with K■■■a is there, that
becomes also K■■■a. This is the idea.
This is the instruction of ■r■la R■pa Gosv■m■ in his Bhakti-ras■m■ta-sindhu.
So just like we, in propagating K■■■a consciousness, we have to deal with money or persons who are
not K■■■a conscious, outsider. We have to deal with them. But when we go to outsider or when we
deal with money, there is relationship with K■■■a, k■■■a-sambandha. So R■pa Gosv■m■ has
distinguished the . . .
Pr■pañcika means material. So pr■pañcikatay■ buddhy■ hari-sambandhi-vastuna■. Everything has
got connection with K■■■a because ultimately everything is K■■■a's energy.
The material world is also manifestation of K■■■a's energy. Bh■mir ■po 'nalo v■yu■ (BG 7.4), you'll
find. Material world means these five elements, gross and subtle. Earth, water, air, fire, sky, these are
gross. And mind, intelligence and ego, these are subtle. These elements, material elements, K■■■a
says, bhinn■ me prak■tir a■■adh■: "These material elements, they are separated, but they are My
energy. They are My energy." The same example: Just like cloud. Cloud is created by the sun. It is
sun's energy which creates the cloud. You know. By temperature the seawater is evaporated, forms
into gas. That is cloud. So cloud is created by the energy of the sun, but when there is cloud you cannot
see the sun; sun is covered. Similarly, material energy is K■■■a's energy. But when you become
covered by this material energy, you do not see K■■■a. This is the position.
So we have to use our intelligence. That is described by ■r■la R■pa Gosv■m■: pr■pañcikatay■
buddhy■ hari-sambandhi-vastuna■, mumuk■ubhi■ parity■ga■. Mumuk■u, especially the
M■y■v■d■s, who are after liberation, to merge into the existence of the Supreme, mumuk■u, mok■a,
they, M■y■v■da, they say: "Everything is m■y■." Brahma satya■ jagan mithy■: "This world is false,
only Brahman is reality." But we say that why the jagat, the world, should be false if it is coming from
the reality? We do not agree with them. We do not accept that this world is false. No.
We can say: "It is temporary manifestation." But it is not false. Why it is false? We are living in this
house. If somebody, some rascal, says, "It is false," why false? We are utilizing this house. We are
utilizing this microphone. We are utilizing the Dictaphone. Why it is false? There is sambandha. There
is relationship with K■■■a. Anything material, made of earth, water, fire, air, they are K■■■a's
energies. Therefore there is direct relationship with K■■■a. And if K■■■a is reality, why His energy
should be false? No. We must know how to utilize it.
So similarly, in this battlefield, K■■■a is there, and all the living entities . . . some of them are soldiers,
some of them are commander-in-chief, some of them this, that— or the chariot or the
ground—everything K■■■a's energy. So if we remember that everything is manifestation of K■■■a's
energy, there is no question of materialism. It is all spiritual energy. So nirbandha■
k■■■a-sambandhe. So we have to use them for K■■■a.
Here all of of them have gathered. This is another K■■■a's energy. K■■■a appears, paritr■■■ya
s■dh■n■■ vin■■■ya ca du■k■t■m (BG 4.8). He wanted to kill all the demons. That is another side
of His business. As one side, paritr■■■ya s■dh■n■m, to give protection to the devotees, the other
side is to vanquish all the demons. Just like if you want to grow paddy on the field, so first of all you
have to destroy all the unwanted weeds. Then you grow the seeds, it will come out nicely.
So these two things are required, destruction and construction. Both the things are K■■■a's activities
or different energies. So you cannot accept one thing, giving up the other side. We have to understand
that both sides, they are working as different manifestation of K■■■a's energy. Par■sya ■aktir
vividhaiva ■r■yate (■vet■■vatara Upani■ad 6.8, Cc. Madhya 13.65, purport). In the Vedas it is said
that the Absolute has got multi-energies. So one energy is working in one way, another energy is
working another way. Par■sya ■aktir vividhaiva ■r■yate, sv■-bh■vik■ jñ■na-bala-kriy■ ca. Just like
here also, when we do something, we require varieties of energies to make that thing perfect. So
everything K■■■a, K■■■a's, this material world or spiritual world, everything is working in order,
under different energies.
So these, I mean to say, warriors' name mentioning, we should not neglect. K■■■a wanted to gather
all the demonic power in that Battlefield of Kuruk■etra and kill them. That was His plan. So there is a
plan of K■■■a. Nirbandha■ k■■■a-sambandhe. We should not be attached to things as they are, but
we should try to understand that there is relationship with K■■■a. And as soon as there is relationship
with K■■■a, we shall properly utilize it. That is K■■■a consciousness. As soon as we understand that
there is relationship with K■■■a, nirbandhe k■■■a-sambandhe . . .
Everything can be utilized for K■■■a. K■■■a is not a stereotyped, stagnant block. K■■■a is a
dynamic force. Therefore everything can be dovetailed in the service of K■■■a. Simply one should
learn the art under proper guidance how to utilize. Then that will be perfect form of K■■■a
consciousness.
(aside) Read next verse.
Pradyumna:
(break)
Translation: "There are also great, heroic, powerful fighters like Dh■■■aketu, Cekit■na, K■■ir■ja,
Purujit, Kuntibhoja and ■aibya."
Prabhup■da: Practically in the Battle of Kuruk■etra great personalities, warriors, from all parts of the
world they came and joined. Some of them joined with this party and others joined with the other party.
So far we have studied . . . just like ■aibya, he belonged to ■ibya. So all these personalities, we did not
get their full description, it would enhance the pages. But these big personalities, we have got their
information. There is a book, The Personalities of Mah■bh■rata. Bhagavad-g■t■ is part of
Mah■bh■rata. Mah■bh■rata means greater India. Mah■ means greater, and bh■rata means India.
So this whole planet was Bh■rata-var■a. There was only one flag. The whole planet was being ruled
by one king. That is the king of this Hastin■pura. The fight is that who would be the king, Mah■r■ja
Yudhi■■hira or Duryodhana. But a king . . . it is not a democraty; it is monarchy. So K■■■a is
deciding, "No, Duryodhana is unfit. Mah■r■ja Yudhi■■hira is fit." This is K■■■a's desire. Therefore
this fight is there. Kuruk■etra, K■■■a wanted to wipe out all unwanted demons from the face of the
world and enthrone Mah■r■ja Yudhi■■hira, because he is the exact representative of K■■■a.
So monarchy or dictatorship is welcome. Now the Communist, they want dictatorship. That is welcome,
provided that particular dictator is trained like Mah■r■ja Yudhi■■hira. Not that simply by votes of some
rascal population one becomes dictatorship, another rascal comes, another big rascal comes. Just like
in the Communist country the Stalin was their dictator, and in the historical record it is said that he is the
greatest criminal in the history of the world. Greatest criminal. He would not tolerate anyone going
against him. As soon as he finds that, "This man is going against me," immediately call him, "Now here
is poison and here is resignation." Or kill him. "You take poison or I shall kill you." This was his policy. In
this way he killed so many enemies. He not only killed the czar family. So his business was killing. Not
that kind of dictatorship wanted. Dictatorship wanted that by his direction the citizens will be so happy
that even they will not have any anxiety. Adhayo vyadhaya■.
We have read the other day in the ■r■mad-Bh■gavatam, there are three kinds of miserable condition
of life, bh■t■tma-hetava■ (SB 1.10.6). The cause . . . they are caused by three principles: adhy■tmika,
adhibhautika, adhidaivika. Daiva-bh■t■tma-hetava■. These are all described in the
■r■mad-Bh■gavatam. Daiva means controlled by the higher demigods. Just like famine or
earthquake, this is not under your control. At any time the earthquake there may be. There may be
famine. There may be pestilence. There may be natural disturbance, flood. This is called daiva,
controlled by higher demigods. Just like Indra wanted to overflood V■nd■vana, being angry upon the
residents of the . . . K■■■a saved, Giridh■r■. He became Giridh■r■.
So these disturbances are there, adhy■tmika, adhibhautika. But the king or the dictator should be so
perfect, and he will guide the citizen in such a way that they will not feel all these disturbances. That
kind of dictatorship wanted. He will direct in such a way that even this natural adhy■tmika, adhibhautika
. . . adhibhautika means, "You are envious of me, I am envious of you." So there is always Cold War,
struggle. This should be stopped. There should not be unnatural heat or unnatural cold, excessive heat.
People will feel in all respect happy.
If that condition can be brought in, like Mah■r■ja Yudhi■■hira or his forefathers, or even his grandson
. . . after Mah■r■ja Yudhi■■hira, there was no kingdom of Mah■r■ja Yud . . . of the son of
Yudhi■■hira or Arjuna. All died in the Battlefield of Kuruk■etra. Only one grandson was in the womb of
his mother, posthumous child. He was saved only. So up to that point, Mah■r■ja Par■k■it, the whole
planet was very nicely governed by dictatorship. So we can bring in such dictatorship, provided that
dictator is perfectly K■■■a conscious. Under his guidance, everything . . . because he knows how to
conduct kingdom, how to make everyone happy. Nirbandha■ k■■■a-sambandhe.
So here is another list of fighters. But the real purpose of this battlefield is to bring all the fighters, big
fighters of the world, together. And under K■■■a's guidance they would be all killed. Nimitta-m■tra■
bhava savyas■cin (BG 11.33). When Arjuna was declining to fight, K■■■a ultimately said, "My dear
Arjuna, you fight or not fight, it doesn't matter. These people are not going back home. It is already
settled up. You simply become . . . take the credit that you have fought and killed. It is al . . . they are
already killed, because that is My plan." Nimitta-m■tra■ bhava savyas■cin. They are already killed.
So this battlefield, because K■■■a wanted to kill them, and the result was—you will find in the
Bhagavad-g■t■—they all attained svar■pa. Anyone who was killed, who died in the Battlefield of
Kuruk■etra, in the presence of K■■■a, they all attained their original, constitutional position, spiritual
form. They all went back to home, back to Godhead, everyone. Therefore K■■■a is Absolute. Either
His killing or His protecting, it is all the same. You don't think that K■■■a is killing. No. If anyone is
killed by K■■■a, he immediately gets liberation: the liberation for which great, great saintly persons,
sages, they undergo severe austerities for life after life, simply by being killed, he gets that.
So by becoming K■■■a's enemy, one gets this benefit, just think over if you become K■■■a's friend,
what is the benefit. That is K■■■a consciousness. The M■y■v■d■s, they are after liberation. So this
liberation is granted even to the enemies of K■■■a. They are also enemies. The M■y■v■d■s, they
are also enemies. K■■■e apar■dh■. They are offender to K■■■a because they do not accept the
form of K■■■a. Therefore they are offender.
So everything studied in relationship with K■■■a, that is perfect knowledge, and that is described in
the Bhagavad-g■t■. So it is not that like sahajiy■s that we are interested with K■■■a's r■sa dance,
not with this fighting in the battlefields of Kuruk■etra. This is sahajiy■-bh■va. This is not wanted.
Thank you very much. Hare K■■■a.
Devotees: All glories to ■r■la Prabhup■da. (end)
