that due to forgetfulness of Krsna he has become conditioned by the
laws of material nature. He can also understand that this human form oflife is an opportunity to regain Krsna consciousness and that it shouldbe fully utilized to attain the causeless mercy of the Supreme Lord.Many subjects have been discussed in this chapter: the man in distress,the inquisitive man, the man in want of material necessities, knowledgeof Brahman, knowledge of Paramatma, liberation from birth, death anddiseases, and worship of the Supreme Lord. However, he who is actuallyelevated in Krsna consciousness does not care for the differentprocesses. He simply directly engages himself in activities of Krsnaconsciousness and thereby factually attains his constitutional positionas an eternal servitor of Lord Krsna. In such a situation he takespleasure in hearing and glorifying the Supreme Lord in pure devotionalservice. He is convinced that by doing so, all his objectives will befulfilled. This determined faith is called drdha-vrata, and that is thebeginning of bhakti-yoga or transcendental loving service. That is theverdict of all scriptures. This Seventh Chapter of the Gita is thesubstance of that conviction.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Seventh Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Knowledge of the Absolute.
Chapter 8
Attaining the Supreme
TEXT 1
arjuna uvaca
kim tad brahma kim adhyatmamkim karma purusottamaadhibhutam ca kim proktamadhidaivam kim ucyate
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; kim--what; tat--that; brahma--Brahman; kim-
-what; adhyatmam--the self; kim--what; karma--fruitive activities;purusa-uttama--O Supreme Person; adhibhutam--the materialmanifestation; ca--and; kim--what; proktam--is called; adhidaivam--thedemigods; kim--what; ucyate--is called.
TRANSLATIONArjuna inquired: O my Lord, O Supreme Person, what is Brahman? What is
the self? What are fruitive activities? What is this materialmanifestation? And what are the demigods? Please explain this to me.
PURPORTIn this chapter Lord Krsna answers these different questions from
Arjuna beginning with, "What is Brahman?" The Lord also explains karma,fruitive activities, devotional service and yoga principles, anddevotional service in its pure form. The Srimad-Bhagavatam explainsthat the Supreme Absolute Truth is known as Brahman, Paramatma, andBhagavan. In addition, the living entity, individual soul, is alsocalled Brahman. Arjuna also inquires about atma, which refers to body,soul and mind. According to the Vedic dictionary, atma refers to themind, soul, body and senses also.
Arjuna has addressed the Supreme Lord as Purusottama, Supreme Person,
which means that he was putting these questions not simply to a friendbut to the Supreme Person, knowing Him to be the supreme authority ableto give definitive answers.
TEXT 2
adhiyajnah katham ko 'tra
dehe 'smin madhusudanaprayana-kale ca kathamjneyo 'si niyatatmabhih
SYNONYMSadhiyajnah--the Lord of sacrifice; katham--how; kah--who; atra--here;
dehe--in the body; asmin--in this; madhusudana--O Madhusudana; prayana-kale--at the time of death; ca--and; katham--how; jneyah--be known;asi--You can; niyata-atmabhih--by the self-controlled.
TRANSLATIONHow does this Lord of sacrifice live in the body, and in which part
does He live, O Madhusudana? And how can those engaged in devotionalservice know You at the time of death?
PURPORT"Lord of sacrifice" may refer to either Indra or Visnu. Visnu is the
chief of the primal demigods, including Brahma and Siva, and Indra isthe chief of the administrative demigods. Both Indra and Visnu areworshiped by yajna performances. But here Arjuna asks who is actuallythe Lord of yajna (sacrifice) and how is the Lord residing within thebody of the living entity.Arjuna addresses the Lord as Madhusudana because Krsna once killed ademon named Madhu. Actually these questions, which are of the nature ofdoubts, should not have arisen in the mind of Arjuna because Arjuna isa Krsna conscious devotee. Therefore these doubts are like demons.Since Krsna is so expert in killing demons, Arjuna here addresses Himas Madhusudana so that Krsna might kill the demonic doubts that arisein Arjuna's mind.Now the word prayana-kale in this verse is very significant becausewhatever we do in life will be tested at the time of death. Arjunafears that at the time of death, those who are in Krsna consciousnesswill forget the Supreme Lord because at such a time body functions aredisrupted and the mind may be in a panic-stricken state. ThereforeMaharaja Kulasekhara, a great devotee, prays, "My dear Lord, may I dieimmediately now that I am healthy so that the swan of my mind may enterinto the stem of Thy lotus feet." This metaphor is used because theswan often takes pleasure in entering the stem of the lotus flower--similarly, the mind of the pure devotee is drawn to the lotus feet ofthe Lord. Maharaja Kulasekhara fears that at the moment of death histhroat will be so choked up that he will not be able to chant the holynames, so it is better to "die immediately." Arjuna questions how one'smind can remain fixed on Krsna's lotus feet at such times.
TEXT 3
sri-bhagavan uvaca
aksaram brahma paramam
svabhavo 'dhyatmam ucyatebhuta-bhavodbhava-karovisargah karma-samjnitah
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; aksaram--
indestructible; brahma--Brahman; paramam--transcendental; svabhavah--eternal nature; adhyatmam--the self; ucyate--is called; bhuta-bhava-udbhava-karah--action producing the material bodies of the livingentities; visargah--creation; karma--fruitive activities; samjnitah--iscalled.
TRANSLATIONThe Supreme Lord said: The indestructible, transcendental living entity
is called Brahman and his eternal nature is called the self. Actionpertaining to the development of these material bodies is called karma,or fruitive activities.
PURPORTBrahman is indestructible and eternally existing, and its constitution
is not changed at any time. Beyond Brahman there is Parabrahman.Brahman refers to the living entity, and Parabrahman refers to theSupreme Personality of Godhead. The constitutional position of theliving entity is different from the position he takes in the materialworld. In material consciousness, his nature is to try to be the lordof matter, but in spiritual (Krsna) consciousness, his position is toserve the Supreme. When the living entity is in material consciousness,he has to take on various bodies in the material world. That is calledkarma, or varied creation by the force of material consciousness.In Vedic literature the living entity is called jivatma and Brahman,but he is never called Parabrahman. The living entity (jivatma) takesdifferent positions--sometimes he merges into the dark material natureand identifies himself with matter, and sometimes he identifies himselfwith the superior spiritual nature. Therefore he is called the SupremeLord's marginal energy. According to his identification with materialor spiritual nature, he receives a material or spiritual body. Inmaterial nature he may take a body from any of the 8,400,000 species oflife, but in spiritual nature he has only one body. In material naturehe is sometimes manifested as a man, demigod, animal, beast, bird,etc., according to his karma. To attain material heavenly planets andenjoy their facilities, he sometimes performs sacrifices (yajna), butwhen his merit is exhausted, he returns to earth again in the form of aman.In the process of sacrifice, the living entity makes specificsacrifices to attain specific heavenly planets and consequently reachesthem. When the merit of sacrifice is exhausted, then the living entitydescends to earth in the form of rain, then takes on the form ofgrains, and the grains are eaten by man and transformed into semen,which impregnates a woman, and thus the living entity once againattains the human form to perform sacrifice and so repeat the samecycle. In this way, the living entity perpetually comes and goes on thematerial path. The Krsna conscious person, however, avoids suchsacrifices. He takes directly to Krsna consciousness and therebyprepares himself to return to Godhead.
Impersonalist commentators on the Gita unreasonably assume that Brahman
takes the form of jiva in the material world, and to substantiate thisthey refer to Chapter Fifteen, verse 7, of the Gita. But this versealso speaks of the living entity as "an eternal fragment of Myself."The fragment of God, the living entity, may fall down into the materialworld, but the Supreme Lord (Acyuta) never falls down. Therefore thisassumption that the Supreme Brahman assumes the form of jiva is notacceptable. It is important to remember that in Vedic literatureBrahman (the living entity) is distinguished from Parabrahman (theSupreme Lord).
TEXT 4
adhibhutam ksaro bhavah
purusas cadhidaivatamadhiyajno 'ham evatradehe deha-bhrtam vara
SYNONYMSadhibhutam--the physical manifestation; ksarah--constantly changing;
bhavah--nature; purusah--the universal form; ca--and; adhidaivatam--including all demigods like the sun and moon; adhiyajnah--theSupersoul; aham--I (Krsna); eva--certainly; atra--in this; dehe--body;deha-bhrtam--of the embodied; vara--the Supreme.
TRANSLATIONPhysical nature is known to be endlessly mutable. The universe is the
cosmic form of the Supreme Lord, and I am that Lord represented as theSupersoul, dwelling in the heart of every embodied being.
PURPORTThe physical nature is constantly changing. Material bodies generally
pass through six stages: they are born, they grow, they remain for someduration, they produce some by-products, they dwindle, and then theyvanish. This physical nature is called adhibhuta. Because it is createdat a certain point and will be annihilated at a certain point, theconception of the universal form of the Supreme Lord that includes alldemigods and their different planets is called adhidaivata. Theindividual soul (jiva) accompanies the body. The Supersoul, a plenaryrepresentation of Lord Krsna, is called the Paramatma or adhiyajna andis situated in the heart. The word eva is particularly important in thecontext of this verse because by this word the Lord stresses that theParamatma is not different from Him. The Supersoul, the SupremePersonality of Godhead, seated beside the individual soul, is thewitness of the individual soul's activities and is the source ofconsciousness. The Supersoul gives the jiva an opportunity to actfreely, and He witnesses his activities. The functions of all thesedifferent manifestations of the Supreme Lord automatically becomeclarified for the pure Krsna conscious devotee engaged intranscendental service of the Lord. The gigantic universal form of theLord called adhidaivata is contemplated by the neophyte who cannotapproach the Supreme Lord in His manifestation as Supersoul. Theneophyte is advised to contemplate the universal form whose legs areconsidered the lower planets and whose eyes are considered the sun andmoon, and whose head is considered the upper planetary system.
TEXT 5
anta-kale ca mam eva
smaran muktva kalevaramyah prayati sa mad-bhavamyati nasty atra samsayah
SYNONYMSanta-kale--at the end of life; ca--also; mam--unto Me; eva--certainly;
smaran--remembering; muktva--quitting; kalevaram--the body; yah--hewho; prayati--goes; sah--he; mat-bhavam--My nature; yati--achieves; na--not; asti--there is; atra--here; samsayah--doubt.
TRANSLATIONAnd whoever, at the time of death, quits his body, remembering Me
alone, at once attains My nature. Of this there is no doubt.
PURPORTIn this verse the importance of Krsna consciousness is stressed. Anyone
who quits his body in Krsna consciousness is at once transferred to thetranscendental abode of the Supreme Lord. The word smaran("remembering") is important. Remembrance of Krsna is not possible forthe impure soul who has not practiced Krsna consciousness in devotionalservice. To remember Krsna one should chant the maha-mantra, HareKrsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, RamaRama, Hare Hare, incessantly, following in the footsteps of LordCaitanya, being more tolerant than a tree, humbler than the grass andoffering all respect to others without requiring respect in return. Insuch a way one will be able to depart from the body successfullyremembering Krsna and so attain the supreme goal.
TEXT 6
yam yam vapi smaran bhavam
tyajaty ante kalevaramtam tam evaiti kaunteyasada tad-bhava-bhavitah
SYNONYMSyam yam--whatever; va--either; api--also; smaran--remembering; bhavam--
nature; tyajati--give up; ante--at the end; kalevaram--this body; tamtam--similar; eva--certainly; eti--gets; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;sada--always; tat--that; bhava--state of being; bhavitah--remembering.
TRANSLATIONWhatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body, that
state he will attain without fail.
PURPORTThe process of changing one's nature at the critical moment of death is
here explained. How can one die in the proper state of mind? Maharaja
Bharata thought of a deer at the time of death and so was transferred
to that form of life. However, as a deer, Maharaja Bharata couldremember his past activities. Of course the cumulative effect of thethoughts and actions of one's life influences one's thoughts at themoment of death; therefore the actions of this life determine one'sfuture state of being. If one is transcendentally absorbed in Krsna'sservice, then his next body will be transcendental (spiritual), notphysical. Therefore the chanting of Hare Krsna is the best process forsuccessfully changing one's state of being to transcendental life.
TEXT 7
tasmat sarvesu kalesu
mam anusmara yudhya camayy arpita-mano-buddhirmam evaisyasy asamsayah
SYNONYMStasmat--therefore; sarvesu--always; kalesu--time; mam--unto Me;
anusmara--go on remembering; yudhya--fight; ca--also; mayi--unto Me;arpita--surrender; manah--mind; buddhih--intellect; mam--unto Me; eva--surely; esyasi--will attain; asamsayah--beyond a doubt.
TRANSLATIONTherefore, Arjuna, you should always think of Me in the form of Krsna
and at the same time carry out your prescribed duty of fighting. Withyour activities dedicated to Me and your mind and intelligence fixed onMe, you will attain Me without doubt.
PURPORTThis instruction to Arjuna is very important for all men engaged in
material activities. The Lord does not say that one should give up hisprescribed duties or engagements. One can continue them and at the sametime think of Krsna by chanting Hare Krsna. This will free one frommaterial contamination and engage the mind and intelligence in Krsna.By chanting Krsna's names, one will be transferred to the supremeplanet, Krsnaloka, without a doubt.
TEXT 8
abhyasa-yoga-yuktena
cetasa nanya-gaminaparamam purusam divyamyati parthanucintayan
SYNONYMSabhyasa--practice; yoga-yuktena--being engaged in meditation; cetasa--
by the mind and intelligence; na anya-gamina--without their beingdeviated; paramam--the Supreme; purusam--Personality of Godhead;divyam--transcendental; yati--achieves; partha--O son of Prtha;anucintayan--constantly thinking of.
TRANSLATION
He who meditates on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, his mind
constantly engaged in remembering Me, undeviated from the path, he, OPartha [Arjuna], is sure to reach Me.
PURPORTIn this verse Lord Krsna stresses the importance of remembering Him.
One's memory of Krsna is revived by chanting the maha-mantra, HareKrsna. By this practice of chanting and hearing the sound vibration ofthe Supreme Lord, one's ear, tongue and mind are engaged. This mysticmeditation is very easy to practice, and it helps one attain theSupreme Lord. Purusam means enjoyer. Although living entities belong tothe marginal energy of the Supreme Lord, they are in materialcontamination. They think themselves enjoyers, but they are not thesupreme enjoyer. Here it is clearly stated that the supreme enjoyer isthe Supreme Personality of Godhead in His different manifestations andplenary expansions as Narayana, Vasudeva, etc.The devotees can constantly think of the object of worship, the SupremeLord, in any of His features--Narayana, Krsna, Rama, etc., by chantingHare Krsna. This practice will purify him, and at the end of his life,due to his constant chanting, he will be transferred to the kingdom ofGod. Yoga practice is meditation on the Supersoul within; similarly, bychanting Hare Krsna one fixes his mind always on the Supreme Lord. Themind is fickle, and therefore it is necessary to engage the mind byforce to think of Krsna. One example often given is that of thecaterpillar that thinks of becoming a butterfly and so is transformedinto a butterfly in the same life. Similarly, if we constantly think ofKrsna, it is certain that at the end of our lives we shall have thesame bodily constitution as Krsna.
TEXT 9
kavim puranam anusasitaram
anor aniyamsam anusmared yahsarvasya dhataram acintya-rupamaditya-varnam tamasah parastat
SYNONYMSkavim--one who knows everything; puranam--the oldest; anusasitaram--the
controller; anoh--of the atom; aniyamsam--smaller than; anusmaret--always thinking; yah--one who; sarvasya--of everything; dhataram--themaintainer; acintya--inconceivable; rupam--form; aditya-varnam--illuminated like the sun; tamasah--of the darkness; parastat--transcendental.
TRANSLATIONOne should meditate upon the Supreme Person as the one who knows
everything, as He who is the oldest, who is the controller, who issmaller than the smallest, who is the maintainer of everything, who isbeyond all material conception, who is inconceivable, and who is alwaysa person. He is luminous like the sun and, being transcendental, isbeyond this material nature.
PURPORT
The process of thinking of the Supreme is mentioned in this verse. The
foremost point is that He is not impersonal or void. One cannotmeditate on something impersonal or void. That is very difficult. Theprocess of thinking of Krsna, however, is very easy and is factuallystated herein. First of all, He is purusa, spiritual, Rama and Krsna,and is described herein as kavim; that is, He knows past, present andfuture and therefore knows everything. He is the oldest personalitybecause He is the origin of everything; everything is born out of Him.He is also the supreme controller of the universe, maintainer andinstructor of humanity. He is smaller than the smallest. The livingentity is one ten-thousandth part of the tip of a hair, but the Lord isso inconceivably small that He enters into the heart of this particle.Therefore He is called smaller than the smallest. As the Supreme, Hecan enter into the atom and into the heart of the smallest and controlhim as the Supersoul. Although so small, He is still all-pervading andis maintaining everything. By Him all these planetary systems aresustained. We often wonder how these big planets are floating in theair. It is stated here that the Supreme Lord, by His inconceivableenergy, is sustaining all these big planets and systems of galaxies.The word acintya (inconceivable) is very significant in thisconnection. God's energy is beyond our conception, beyond our thinkingjurisdiction, and is therefore called inconceivable (acintya). Who canargue this point? He pervades this material world and yet is beyond it.We cannot even comprehend this material world, which is insignificantcompared to the spiritual world--so how can we comprehend what isbeyond? Acintya means that which is beyond this material world, thatwhich our argument, logic and philosophical speculation cannot touch,that which is inconceivable. Therefore intelligent persons, avoidinguseless argument and speculation, should accept what is stated inscriptures like the Vedas, Gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam and follow theprinciples they set down. This will lead one to understanding.
TEXT 10
prayana-kale manasacalena
bhaktya yukto yoga-balena caivabhruvor madhye pranam avesya samyaksa tam param purusam upaiti divyam
SYNONYMSprayana-kale--at the time of death; manasa--by the mind; acalena--
without being deviated; bhaktya--in full devotion; yuktah--engaged;yoga-balena--by the power of mystic yoga; ca--also; eva--certainly;bhruvoh--between the two eyebrows; madhye--in; pranam--the life air;avesya--establishing; samyak--completely; sah--he; tam--that; param--transcendental; purusam--Personality of Godhead; upaiti--achieves;divyam--in the spiritual kingdom.
TRANSLATIONOne who, at the time of death, fixes his life air between the eyebrows
and in full devotion engages himself in remembering the Supreme Lord,will certainly attain to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
In this verse it is clearly stated that at the time of death the mind
must be fixed in devotion on the Supreme Godhead. For those practicedin yoga, it is recommended that they raise the life force between theeyebrows, but for a pure devotee who does not practice such yoga, themind should always be engaged in Krsna consciousness so that at deathhe can remember the Supreme by His grace. This is explained in versefourteen.The particular use of the word yoga-balena is significant in this versebecause without practice of yoga one cannot come to this transcendentalstate of being at the time of death. One cannot suddenly remember theSupreme Lord at death unless he is practiced in some yoga system,especially the system of bhakti-yoga. Since one's mind at death is verydisturbed, one should practice transcendence through yoga during one'slife.
TEXT 11
yad aksaram veda-vido vadanti
visanti yad yatayo vita-ragahyad icchanto brahmacaryam carantitat te padam sangrahena pravaksye
SYNONYMSyat--that which; aksaram--inexhaustible; veda-vidah--a person
conversant with the Vedas; vadanti--say; visanti--enters; yat--inwhich; yatayah--great sages; vita-ragah--in the renounced order oflife; yat--that which; icchantah--desiring; brahmacaryam--celibacy;caranti--practices; tat--that; te--unto you; padam--situation;sangrahena--in summary; pravaksye--I shall explain.
TRANSLATIONPersons learned in the Vedas, who utter omkara and who are great sages
in the renounced order, enter into Brahman. Desiring such perfection,one practices celibacy. I shall now explain to you this process bywhich one may attain salvation.
PURPORTLord Krsna explains that Brahman, although one without a second, has
different manifestations and features. For the impersonalists, thesyllable om is identical with Brahman. Krsna here explains theimpersonal Brahman, in which the renounced order of sages enter.In the Vedic system of knowledge, students, from the very beginning,are taught to vibrate om and learn of the ultimate impersonal Brahmanby living with the spiritual master in complete celibacy. In this waythey realize two of Brahman's features. This practice is very essentialfor the student's advancement in spiritual life, but at the moment suchbrahmacari (unmarried celibate) life is not at all possible. The socialconstruction of the world has changed so much that there is nopossibility of one's practicing celibacy from the beginning of studentlife. Throughout the world there are many institutions for differentdepartments of knowledge, but there is no recognized institution wherestudents can be educated in the brahmacari principles. Unless onepractices celibacy, advancement in spiritual life is very difficult.Therefore Lord Caitanya has announced, according to the scripturalinjunctions for this Age of Kali, that no process of realizing the
Supreme is possible except the chanting of the holy name of Lord Krsna:
Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama,Rama Rama, Hare Hare.
TEXT 12
sarva-dvarani samyamya
mano hrdi nirudhya camurdhny adhayatmanah pranamasthito yoga-dharanam
SYNONYMSsarva-dvarani--all the doors of the body; samyamya--controlling; manah-
-mind; hrdi--in the heart; nirudhya--confined; ca--also; murdhni--onthe head; adhaya--fixed; atmanah--soul; pranam--the life air; asthitah--situated; yoga-dharanam--the yogic situation.
TRANSLATIONThe yogic situation is that of detachment from all sensual engagements.
Closing all the doors of the senses and fixing the mind on the heartand the life air at the top of the head, one establishes himself inyoga.
PURPORTTo practice yoga, as suggested here, one first has to close the door of
all sense enjoyment. This practice is called pratyahara, or withdrawingthe senses from the sense objects. The sense organs for acquiringknowledge, such as the eyes, ears, nose, tongue and touch, should befully controlled and should not be allowed to engage in self-gratification. In this way the mind focuses on the Supersoul in theheart and the life force is raised to the top of the head. In the SixthChapter this process is described in detail. But as mentioned before,this practice is not practical in this age. The best process is Krsnaconsciousness. If one is always able to fix his mind on Krsna indevotional service, it is very easy for him to remain in an undisturbedtranscendental trance, or in samadhi.
TEXT 13
om ity ekaksaram brahma
vyaharan mam anusmaranyah prayati tyajan dehamsa yati paramam gatim
SYNONYMSom--the combination of letters om (omkara); iti--thus; eka-aksaram--
supreme, indestructible; brahma--absolute; vyaharan--vibrating; mam--Me(Krsna); anusmaran--remembering; yah--anyone; prayati--leaves; tyajan--quitting; deham--this body; sah--he; yati--achieves; paramam--supreme;gatim--destination.
TRANSLATION
After being situated in this yoga practice and vibrating the sacred
syllable om, the supreme combination of letters, if one thinks of theSupreme Personality of Godhead and quits his body, he will certainlyreach the spiritual planets.
PURPORTIt is clearly stated here that om, Brahman, and Lord Krsna are not
different. The impersonal sound of Krsna is om, but the sound HareKrsna contains om. It is clearly recommended in this age that if onequits his body at the end of this life chanting the maha-mantra, HareKrsna, he will reach the spiritual planets. Similarly, those who aredevotees of Krsna enter the Krsna planet or Goloka Vrndavana, whereasthe impersonalists remain in the brahmajyoti. The personalists alsoenter many innumerable planets in the spiritual sky known asVaikunthas.
TEXT 14
ananya-cetah satatam
yo mam smarati nityasahtasyaham sulabhah parthanitya-yuktasya yoginah
SYNONYMSananya-cetah--without deviation; satatam--always; yah--anyone; mam--Me
(Krsna); smarati--remembers; nityasah--regularly; tasya--to him; aham--I am; su-labhah--very easy to achieve; partha--O son of Prtha; nitya--regularly; yuktasya--engaged; yoginah--of the devotee.
TRANSLATIONFor one who remembers Me without deviation, I am easy to obtain, O son
of Prtha, because of his constant engagement in devotional service.
PURPORTIn this verse the bhakti-yoga of the unalloyed devotees of the Supreme
Godhead is described. The proceeding verses mention four differentkinds of devotees--the distressed, the inquisitive, those who seekmaterial gain, and the speculative philosophers. Different processes ofliberation from material entanglement have also been described: karma-yoga, jnana-yoga, and hatha-yoga. But here bhakti-yoga, without anymixture of these, is mentioned. In bhakti-yoga the devotees desirenothing but Krsna. The pure bhakti devotee does not desire promotion toheavenly planets, nor does he seek salvation or liberation frommaterial entanglement. A pure devotee does not desire anything. In theCaitanya-caritamrta the pure devotee is called niskama, which means hehas no desire for self-interest. Perfect peace belongs to him alone,not to those who strive for personal gain. The pure devotee only wantsto please the Supreme Lord, and so the Lord says that for anyone who isunflinchingly devoted to Him, He is easy to attain. The devotee canrender service to any of the transcendental forms of the Supreme Lord,and he meets with none of the problems that plague the practitioners ofother yogas. Bhakti-yoga is very simple and pure and easy to perform.One can begin simply by chanting Hare Krsna. Krsna is very merciful tothose who engage in His service, and He helps in various ways that
devotee who has fully surrendered to Him so that he can understand Him
as He is. The Lord gives such a devotee sufficient intelligence so thatultimately the devotee can attain Him in His spiritual kingdom.The special qualification of the pure devotee is that he is alwaysthinking of Krsna without considering the time or place. There shouldbe no impediments. He should be able to carry out his service anywhereand at any time. Some say that the devotee should remain in holy placeslike Vrndavana or some holy town where the Lord lived, but a puredevotee can live anywhere and create the atmosphere of Vrndavana by hisdevotional service. It was Sri Advaita who told Lord Caitanya,"Wherever You are, O Lord--there is Vrndavana."A pure devotee constantly remembers Krsna and meditates upon Him. Theseare qualifications of the pure devotee for whom the Lord is most easilyattainable. Bhakti-yoga is the system that the Gita recommends aboveall others. Generally, the bhakti-yogis are engaged in five differentways: 1) santa-bhakta, engaged in devotional service in neutrality; 2)dasya-bhakta, engaged in devotional service as servant; 3) sakhya-bhakta, engaged as friend; 4) vatsalya-bhakta, engaged as parent; and5) madhurya-bhakta, engaged as conjugal lover of the Supreme Lord. Inany of these ways, the pure devotee is always constantly engaged in thetranscendental loving service of the Supreme Lord and cannot forget theSupreme Lord, and so for him the Lord is easily attained. A puredevotee cannot forget the Supreme Lord for a moment, and similarly, theSupreme Lord cannot forget His pure devotee for a moment. This is thegreat blessing of the Krsna conscious process of chanting the maha-mantra--Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, HareRama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.
TEXT 15
mam upetya punar janma
duhkhalayam asasvatamnapnuvanti mahatmanahsamsiddhim paramam gatah
SYNONYMSmam--unto Me; upetya--achieving; punah--again; janma--birth; duhkha-
alayam--a place of miseries; asasvatam--temporary; na--never;apnuvanti--attain; maha-atmanah--the great souls; samsiddhim--perfection; paramam--ultimate; gatah--achieved.
TRANSLATIONAfter attaining Me, the great souls, who are yogis in devotion, never
return to this temporary world, which is full of miseries, because theyhave attained the highest perfection.
PURPORTSince this temporary material world is full of the miseries of birth,
old age, disease and death, naturally he who achieves the highestperfection and attains the supreme planet, Krsnaloka, Goloka Vrndavana,does not wish to return. The supreme planet is described in Vedicliterature as beyond our material vision, and it is considered thehighest goal. The mahatmas (great souls) receive transcendentalmessages from the realized devotees and thus gradually developdevotional service in Krsna consciousness and become so absorbed in
transcendental service that they no longer desire elevation to any of
the material planets, nor do they even want to be transferred to anyspiritual planet. They only want Krsna's association and nothing else.Such great souls in Krsna consciousness attain the highest perfectionof life. In other words, they are the supreme souls.
TEXT 16
abrahma-bhuvanal lokah
punar avartino 'rjunamam upetya tu kaunteyapunar janma na vidyate
SYNONYMSabrahma--up to the Brahmaloka planet; bhuvanat--from the planetary
systems; lokah--planets; punah--again; avartinah--returning; arjuna--OArjuna; mam--unto Me; upetya--arriving; tu--but; kaunteya--O son ofKunti; punah janma--rebirth; na--never; vidyate--takes to.
TRANSLATIONFrom the highest planet in the material world down to the lowest, all
are places of misery wherein repeated birth and death take place. Butone who attains to My abode, O son of Kunti, never takes birth again.
PURPORTAll kinds of yogis--karma, jnana, hatha, etc.--eventually have to
attain devotional perfection in bhakti-yoga, or Krsna consciousness,before they can go to Krsna's transcendental abode and never return.Those who attain the highest material planets or the planets of thedemigods are again subjected to repeated birth and death. As persons onearth are elevated to higher planets, people in higher planets such asBrahmaloka, Candraloka and Indraloka fall down to earth. The practiceof sacrifice called pancagni-vidya, recommended in the Katha Upanisad,enables one to achieve Brahmaloka, but if, in Brahmaloka, one does notcultivate Krsna consciousness, then he must return to earth. Those whoprogress in Krsna consciousness in the higher planets are graduallyelevated to higher and higher planets and at the time of universaldevastation are transferred to the eternal spiritual kingdom. Whenthere is devastation of this material universe, Brahma and hisdevotees, who are constantly engaged in Krsna consciousness, are alltransferred to the spiritual universe and to specific spiritual planetsaccording to their desires.
TEXT 17
sahasra-yuga-paryantam
ahar yad brahmano viduhratrim yuga-sahasrantamte 'ho-ratra-vido janah
SYNONYMSsahasra--thousand; yuga--millenniums; paryantam--including; ahah--day;
yat--that; brahmanah--of Brahma; viduh--they know; ratrim--night; yuga-
-millenniums; sahasra-antam--similarly, at the end of one thousand; te-
-that; ahah-ratra--day and night; vidah--understand; janah--people.
TRANSLATIONBy human calculation, a thousand ages taken together is the duration of
Brahma's one day. And such also is the duration of his night.
PURPORTThe duration of the material universe is limited. It is manifested in
cycles of kalpas. A kalpa is a day of Brahma, and one day of Brahmaconsists of a thousand cycles of four yugas or ages: Satya, Treta,Dvapara and Kali. The cycle of Satya is characterized by virtue, wisdomand religion, there being practically no ignorance and vice, and theyuga lasts 1,728,000 years. In the Treta-yuga vice is introduced, andthis yuga lasts 1,296,000 years. In the Dvapara-yuga there is an evengreater decline in virtue and religion, vice increasing, and this yugalasts 864,000 years. And finally in Kali-yuga (the yuga that we havenow been experiencing over the past 5,000 years) there is an abundanceof strife, ignorance, irreligion and vice, true virtue beingpractically nonexistent, and this yuga lasts 432,000 years. In Kali-yuga vice increases to such a point that at the termination of the yugathe Supreme Lord Himself appears as the Kalki avatara, vanquishes thedemons, saves His devotees, and commences another Satya-yuga. Then theprocess is set rolling again. These four yugas, rotating a thousandtimes, comprise one day of Brahma, the creator god, and the same numbercomprise one night. Brahma lives one hundred of such "years" and thendies. These "hundred years" by earth calculations total to 311 trillionand 40 billion earth years. By these calculations the life of Brahmaseems fantastic and interminable, but from the viewpoint of eternity itis as brief as a lightning flash. In the Causal Ocean there areinnumerable Brahmas rising and disappearing like bubbles in theAtlantic. Brahma and his creation are all part of the materialuniverse, and therefore they are in constant flux.In the material universe not even Brahma is free from the process ofbirth, old age, disease and death. Brahma, however, is directly engagedin the service of the Supreme Lord in the management of the universe--therefore he at once attains liberation. Elevated sannyasis arepromoted to Brahma's particular planet, Brahmaloka, which is thehighest planet in the material universe and which survives all theheavenly planets in the upper strata of the planetary system, but indue course Brahma and all the inhabitants of Brahmaloka are subject todeath, according to the law of material nature.
TEXT 18
avyaktad vyaktayah sarvah
prabhavanty ahar-agameratry-agame praliyantetatraivavyakta-samjnake
SYNONYMSavyaktat--from the unmanifest; vyaktayah--living entities; sarvah--all;
prabhavanti--come into being; ahah-agame--at the beginning of the day;ratri-agame--at the fall of night; praliyante--are annihilated; tatra--there; eva--certainly; avyakta--the unmanifest; samjnake--called.
TRANSLATION
When Brahma's day is manifest, this multitude of living entities comes
into being, and at the arrival of Brahma's night they are allannihilated.
TEXT 19
bhuta-gramah sa evayam
bhutva bhutva praliyateratry-agame 'vasah parthaprabhavaty ahar-agame
SYNONYMSbhuta-gramah--the aggregate of all living entities; sah--they; eva--
certainly; ayam--this; bhutva bhutva--taking birth; praliyate--annihilate; ratri--night; agame--on arrival; avasah--automatically;partha--O son of Prtha; prabhavati--manifest; ahah--during daytime;agame--on arrival.
TRANSLATIONAgain and again the day comes, and this host of beings is active; and
again the night falls, O Partha, and they are helplessly dissolved.
PURPORTThe less intelligent jivas, who try to remain within this material
world, are accordingly elevated and degraded in the various planetarysystems. During the daytime of Brahma they exhibit their activities,and at the coming of Brahma's night they are annihilated. In the daythey receive various bodies for material activities, and at night thesebodies perish. The jivas (individual souls) remain compact in the bodyof Visnu and again and again are manifest at the arrival of Brahma'sday. When Brahma's life is finally finished, they are all annihilatedand remain unmanifest for millions and millions of years. When Brahmais born again in another millennium they are again manifest. In thisway the jivas are captivated by the material world. However, thoseintelligent beings who take to Krsna consciousness and chant HareKrsna, Hare Rama in devotional service transfer themselves, even inthis life, to the spiritual planet of Krsna and become eternallyblissful there, not being subject to such rebirths.
TEXT 20
paras tasmat tu bhavo 'nyo
'vyakto 'vyaktat sanatanahyah sa sarvesu bhutesunasyatsu na vinasyati
SYNONYMSparah--transcendental; tasmat--from that; tu--but; bhavah--nature;
anyah--another; avyaktah--unmanifest; avyaktat--from the unmanifest;sanatanah--eternal; yah--that; sah--which; sarvesu--all; bhutesu--
manifestation; nasyatsu--being annihilated; na--never; vinasyati--
annihilated.
TRANSLATIONYet there is another nature, which is eternal and is transcendental to
this manifested and unmanifested matter. It is supreme and is neverannihilated. When all in this world is annihilated, that part remainsas it is.
PURPORTKrsna's superior spiritual energy is transcendental and eternal. It is
beyond all the changes of material nature, which is manifest andannihilated during the days and nights of Brahma. Krsna's superiorenergy is completely opposite in quality to material nature. Superiorand inferior nature are explained in the Seventh Chapter.
TEXT 21
avyakto 'ksara ity uktas
tam ahuh paramam gatimyam prapya na nivartantetad dhama paramam mama
SYNONYMSavyaktah--unmanifested; aksarah--infallible; iti--thus; uktah--said;
tam--that which; ahuh--is known; paramam--ultimate; gatim--destination;yam--that which; prapya--gaining; na--never; nivartante--comes back;tat dhama--that abode; paramam--supreme; mama--Mine.
TRANSLATIONThat supreme abode is called unmanifested and infallible, and it is the
supreme destination. When one goes there, he never comes back. That isMy supreme abode.
PURPORTThe supreme abode of the Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is described in
the Brahma-samhita as cintamani-dhama, a place where all desires arefulfilled. The supreme abode of Lord Krsna known as Goloka Vrndavana isfull of palaces made of touchstone. There are also trees which arecalled "desire trees," that supply any type of eatable upon demand, andthere are cows known as surabhi cows which supply a limitless supply ofmilk. In this abode, the Lord is served by hundreds of thousands ofgoddesses of fortune (Laksmis), and He is called Govinda, the primalLord and the cause of all causes. The Lord is accustomed to blow Hisflute (venum kvanantam). His transcendental form is the most attractivein all the worlds--His eyes are like the lotus petals and the color ofHis body is like clouds. He is so attractive that His beauty excelsthat of thousands of Cupids. He wears saffron cloth, a garland aroundHis neck and a peacock feather in His hair. In the Gita Lord Krsnagives only a small hint of His personal abode (Goloka Vrndavana) whichis the supermost planet in the spiritual kingdom. A vivid descriptionis given in the Brahma-samhita. Vedic literature (Katha Upanisad1.3.11) states that there is nothing superior to the abode of the
Supreme Godhead, and that that abode is the ultimate destination
(purusan na param kincit sa kastha parama gatih). When one attains toit, he never returns to the material world. Krsna's supreme abode andKrsna Himself are nondifferent, being of the same quality. On thisearth, Vrndavana, ninety miles southeast of Delhi, is a replica of thatsupreme Goloka Vrndavana located in the spiritual sky. When Krsnadescended on this earth He sported on that particular tract of landknown as Vrndavana in the district of Mathura, India.
TEXT 22
purusah sa parah partha
bhaktya labhyas tv ananyayayasyantah-sthani bhutaniyena sarvam idam tatam
SYNONYMSpurusah--the Supreme Personality; sah--He; parah--the Supreme, than
whom no one is greater; partha--O son of Prtha; bhaktya--by devotionalservice; labhyah--can be achieved; tu--but; ananyaya--unalloyed,undeviating devotion; yasya--whom; antah-sthani--within; bhutani--allof this material manifestation; yena--by whom; sarvam--all; idam--whatever we can see; tatam--distributed.
TRANSLATIONThe Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is greater than all, is
attainable by unalloyed devotion. Although He is present in His abode,He is all-pervading, and everything is situated within Him.
PURPORTIt is here clearly stated that the supreme destination from which there
is no return is the abode of Krsna, the Supreme Person. The Brahma-samhita describes this supreme abode as ananda-cinmaya-rasa, a placewhere everything is full of spiritual bliss. Whatever variegatedness ismanifest there is all of the quality of spiritual bliss--there isnothing material. All variegatedness is expanded as the spiritualexpansion of the Supreme Godhead Himself, for the manifestation thereis totally of the spiritual energy, as explained in Chapter Seven. Asfar as this material world is concerned, although the Lord is always inHis supreme abode, He is nonetheless all-pervading by His materialenergy. So by His spiritual and material energies He is presenteverywhere--both in the material and in the spiritual universes.Yasyantah-sthani means that everything is sustained by Him, whether itbe spiritual or material energy.It is clearly stated here that only by bhakti, or devotional service,can one enter into the Vaikuntha (spiritual) planetary system. In allthe Vaikunthas there is only one Supreme Godhead, Krsna, who hasexpanded Himself into millions and millions of plenary expansions.These plenary expansions are four-armed, and They preside over theinnumerable spiritual planets. They are known by a variety of names--Purusottama, Trivikrama, Kesava, Madhava, Aniruddha, Hrsikesa,Sankarsana, Pradyumna, Sridhara, Vasudeva, Damodara, Janardana,Narayana, Vamana, Padmanabha, etc. These plenary expansions are likenedunto the leaves of a tree, and the main tree is likened to Krsna.Krsna, dwelling in Goloka Vrndavana, His supreme abode, systematically
conducts all affairs of both universes (material and spiritual) without
a flaw by power of His all-pervasiveness.
TEXT 23
yatra kale tv anavrttim
avrttim caiva yoginahprayata yanti tam kalamvaksyami bharatarsabha
SYNONYMSyatra--in that; kale--time; tu--but; anavrttim--no return; avrttim--
return; ca--also; eva--certainly; yoginah--of different kinds ofmystics; prayatah--one who goes; yanti--departs; tam--that; kalam--time; vaksyami--describing; bharatarsabha--O best of the Bharatas.
TRANSLATIONO best of the Bharatas, I shall now explain to you the different times
at which, passing away from this world, one does or does not come back.
PURPORTThe unalloyed devotees of the Supreme Lord who are totally surrendered
souls do not care when they leave their bodies or by what method. Theyleave everything in Krsna's hands and so easily and happily return toGodhead. But those who are not unalloyed devotees and who dependinstead on such methods of spiritual realization as karma-yoga, jnana-yoga, hatha-yoga, etc., must leave the body at a suitable time andthereby be assured whether or not they will return to the world ofbirth and death.If the yogi is perfect, he can select the time and place for leavingthis material world, but if he is not so perfect, then he has to leaveat nature's will. The most suitable time to leave the body and notreturn is being explained by the Lord in these verses. According toAcarya Baladeva Vidyabhusana, the Sanskrit word kala used herein refersto the presiding deity of time.
TEXT 24
agnir jyotir ahah suklah
san-masa uttarayanamtatra prayata gacchantibrahma brahma-vido janah
SYNONYMSagnih--fire; jyotih--light; ahah--day; suklah--white; sat-masah--six
months; uttara-ayanam--when the sun passes on the northern side; tatra--there; prayatah--one who goes; gacchanti--passes away; brahma--to theAbsolute; brahma-vidah--one who knows the Absolute; janah--person.
TRANSLATIONThose who know the Supreme Brahman pass away from the world during the
influence of the fiery god, in the light, at an auspicious moment,
during the fortnight of the moon and the six months when the sun
travels in the north.
PURPORTWhen fire, light, day and moon are as mentioned, it is to be understood
that over all of them there are various presiding deities who makearrangements for the passage of the soul. At the time of death, thejiva sets forth on the path to a new life. If one leaves the body atthe time designated above, either accidentally or by arrangement, it ispossible for him to attain the impersonal brahmajyoti. Mystics who areadvanced in yoga practice can arrange the time and place to leave thebody. Others have no control--if by accident they leave at anauspicious moment, then they will not return to the cycle of birth anddeath, but if not, then there is every possibility that they will haveto return. However, for the pure devotee in Krsna consciousness, thereis no fear of returning, whether he leaves the body at an auspicious orinauspicious moment, by accident or arrangement.
TEXT 25
dhumo ratris tatha krsnah
san-masa daksinayanamtatra candramasam jyotiryogi prapya nivartate
SYNONYMSdhumah--smoke; ratrih--night; tatha--also; krsnah--the fortnight of the
dark moon; sat-masah--the six months; daksina-ayanam--when the sunpasses on the southern side; tatra--there; candra-masam--the moonplanet; jyotih--light; yogi--the mystic; prapya--achieves; nivartate--comes back.
TRANSLATIONThe mystic who passes away from this world during the smoke, the night,
the moonless fortnight, or the six months when the sun passes to thesouth, or who reaches the moon planet, again comes back.
PURPORTIn the Third Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam we are informed that those who
are expert in fruitive activities and sacrificial methods on earthattain to the moon at death. These elevated souls live on the moon forabout 10,000 years (by demigod calculations) and enjoy life by drinkingsoma-rasa. They eventually return to earth. This means that on the moonthere are higher classes of living beings, though they may not beperceived by the gross senses.
TEXT 26
sukla-krsne gati hy ete
jagatah sasvate mateekaya yaty anavrttimanyayavartate punah
SYNONYMS
sukla--light; krsne--darkness; gati--passing away; hi--certainly; ete--
all these; jagatah--of the material world; sasvate--of the Vedas; mate--in the opinion; ekaya--by one; yati--goes; anavrttim--no return;anyaya--by the other; avartate--comes back; punah--again.
TRANSLATIONAccording to the Vedas, there are two ways of passing from this world--
one in the light and one in darkness. When one passes in light, he doesnot come back; but when one passes in darkness, he returns.
PURPORTThe same description of departure and return is quoted by Acarya
Baladeva Vidyabhusana from the Chandogya Upanisad (5.10.3-5). In such away, those who are fruitive laborers and philosophical speculators fromtime immemorial are constantly going and coming. Actually they do notattain ultimate salvation, for they do not surrender to Krsna.
TEXT 27
naite srti partha janan
yogi muhyati kascanatasmat sarvesu kalesuyoga-yukto bhavarjuna
SYNONYMSna--never; ete--all these; srti--different paths; partha--O son of
Prtha; janan--even if they know; yogi--the devotees of the Lord;muhyati--bewildered; kascana--anyone; tasmat--therefore; sarvesukalesu--always; yoga-yuktah--being engaged in Krsna consciousness;bhava--just become; arjuna--O Arjuna.
TRANSLATIONThe devotees who know these two paths, O Arjuna, are never bewildered.
Therefore be always fixed in devotion.
PURPORTKrsna is here advising Arjuna that he should not be disturbed by the
different paths the soul can take when leaving the material world. Adevotee of the Supreme Lord should not worry whether he will departeither by arrangement or by accident. The devotee should be firmlyestablished in Krsna consciousness and chant Hare Krsna. He should knowthat concern over either of these two paths is troublesome. The bestway to be absorbed in Krsna consciousness is to be always dovetailed inHis service, and that will make one's path to the spiritual kingdomsafe, certain, and direct. The word yoga-yukta is especiallysignificant in this verse. One who is firm in yoga is constantlyengaged in Krsna consciousness in all his activities. Sri Rupa Gosvamiadvises that one should be unattached in the material world and thatall affairs should be steeped in Krsna consciousness. In this way oneattains perfection. Therefore the devotee is not disturbed by thesedescriptions because he knows that his passage to the supreme abode isguaranteed by devotional service.
TEXT 28
vedesu yajnesu tapahsu caiva
danesu yat punya-phalam pradistamatyeti tat sarvam idam viditvayogi param sthanam upaiti cadyam
SYNONYMSvedesu--in the study of the Vedas; yajnesu--in the performances of
yajna, sacrifice; tapahsu--undergoing different types of austerities;ca--also; eva--certainly; danesu--in giving charities; yat--that which;punya-phalam--the result of pious work; pradistam--directed; atyeti--surpasses; tat--all those; sarvam idam--all those described above;viditva--knowing; yogi--the devotee; param--supreme; sthanam--abode;upaiti--achieved peace; ca--also; adyam--original.
TRANSLATIONA person who accepts the path of devotional service is not bereft of
the results derived from studying the Vedas, performing austeresacrifices, giving charity or pursuing philosophical and fruitiveactivities. At the end he reaches the supreme abode.
PURPORTThis verse is the summation of the Seventh and Eighth chapters,
particularly as the chapters deal with Krsna consciousness anddevotional service. One has to study the Vedas under the guidance ofthe spiritual master and undergo many austerities and penances whileliving under his care. A brahmacari has to live in the home of thespiritual master just like a servant, and he must beg alms from door todoor and bring them to the spiritual master. He takes food only underthe master's order, and if the master neglects to call the student forfood that day, the student fasts. These are some of the Vedicprinciples for observing brahmacarya.After the student studies the Vedas under the master for a period fromfive to twenty years, he may become a man of perfect character. Studyof the Vedas is not meant for the recreation of armchair speculators,but for the formation of character. After this training, the brahmacariis allowed to enter into household life and marry. When he is ahouseholder, he also has to perform many sacrifices and strive forfurther enlightenment. Then after retiring from household life, uponaccepting the order of vanaprastha, he undergoes severe penances, suchas living in forests, dressing with tree bark, not shaving, etc. Bycarrying out the orders of brahmacarya, householder, vanaprastha andfinally sannyasa, one becomes elevated to the perfectional stage oflife. Some are then elevated to the heavenly kingdoms, and when theybecome even more advanced they are liberated in the spiritual sky,either in the impersonal brahmajyoti or in the Vaikuntha planets orKrsnaloka. This is the path outlined by Vedic literatures.The beauty of Krsna consciousness, however, is that by one stroke, byengaging in devotional service, one can surpass all rituals of thedifferent orders of life.One should try to understand the Seventh and Eighth Chapters of theGita not by scholarship or mental speculation, but by hearing them inassociation with pure devotees. Chapters Seven through Twelve are the
