things are existing due to Krsna's entering them as Supersoul. From
Brahma, the most gigantic entity, on down to the smallest ant, all areexisting because the Lord has entered each and all and is sustainingthem.Worship of demigods is discouraged herein because even the greatestdemigods like Brahma and Siva only represent part of the opulence ofthe Supreme Lord. He is the origin of everyone born, and no one isgreater than Him. He is asamaurdhva, which means that no one issuperior to Him and that no one is equal to Him. In the Padma Purana itis said that one who considers the Supreme Lord Krsna in the samecategory with demigods--be they even Brahma or Siva--becomes at once anatheist. If, however, one thoroughly studies the different descriptionsof the opulences and expansions of Krsna's energy, then one canunderstand without any doubt the position of Lord Sri Krsna and can fixhis mind in the worship of Krsna without deviation. The Lord is all-pervading by the expansion of His partial representation, theSupersoul, who enters into everything that is. Pure devotees,therefore, concentrate their minds in Krsna consciousness in fulldevotional service; therefore they are always situated in thetranscendental position. Devotional service and worship of Krsna arevery clearly indicated in this chapter in verses eight through eleven.That is the way of pure devotional service. How one can attain thehighest devotional perfection of association with the SupremePersonality of Godhead has been thoroughly explained in this chapter.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Tenth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of the Opulence of the Absolute.
Chapter 11
The Universal Form
TEXT 1
arjuna uvaca
mad-anugrahaya paramamguhyam adhyatma-samjnitamyat tvayoktam vacas tenamoho 'yam vigato mama
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; mat-anugrahaya--just show me favor;
paramam--supreme; guhyam--confidential; adhyatma--spiritual; samjnitam--in the matter of; yat--what; tvaya--by You; uktam--said; vacah--words;tena--by that; mohah--illusion; ayam--this; vigatah--is educated; mama--my.
TRANSLATIONArjuna said: I have heard Your instruction on confidential spiritual
matters which You have so kindly delivered unto me, and my illusion isnow dispelled.
PURPORTThis chapter reveals Krsna as the cause of all causes. He is even the
cause of the Maha-Visnu, and from Him the material universes emanate.
Krsna is not an incarnation; He is the source of all incarnations. That
has been completely explained in the last chapter.Now, as far as Arjuna is concerned, he says that his illusion is over.This means that Arjuna no longer thinks of Krsna as a mere human being,as a friend of his, but as the source of everything. Arjuna is veryenlightened and is glad that he has a great friend like Krsna, but nowhe is thinking that although he may accept Krsna as the source ofeverything, others may not. So in order to establish Krsna's divinityfor all, he is requesting Krsna in this chapter to show His universalform. Actually when one sees the universal form of Krsna one becomesfrightened, like Arjuna, but Krsna is so kind that after showing it Heconverts Himself again into His original form. Arjuna agrees to whatKrsna has said several times. Krsna is speaking to him just for hisbenefit, and Arjuna acknowledges that all this is happening to him byKrsna's grace. He is now convinced that Krsna is the cause of allcauses and is present in everyone's heart as the Supersoul.
TEXT 2
bhavapyayau hi bhutanam
srutau vistaraso mayatvattah kamala-patraksamahatmyam api cavyayam
SYNONYMSbhava--appearance; apyayau--disappearance; hi--certainly; bhutanam--of
all living entities; srutau--have heard; vistarasah--detail; maya--byme; tvattah--from You; kamala-patra-aksa--O lotus-eyed one; mahatmyam--glories; api--also; ca--and; avyayam--inexhaustible.
TRANSLATIONO lotus-eyed one, I have heard from You in detail about the appearance
and disappearance of every living entity, as realized through Yourinexhaustible glories.
PURPORTArjuna addresses Lord Krsna as "lotus-eyed" (Krsna's eyes appear just
like the petals of a lotus flower) out of his joy, for Krsna hasassured him, in the last verse of the previous chapter, that Hesustains the entire universe with just a fragment of Himself. He is thesource of everything in this material manifestation, and Arjuna hasheard of this from the Lord in detail. Arjuna further knows that inspite of His being the source of all appearances and disappearances, Heis aloof from them. His personality is not lost, although He is all-pervading. That is the inconceivable opulence of Krsna which Arjunaadmits that he has thoroughly understood.
TEXT 3
evam etad yathattha tvam
atmanam paramesvaradrastum icchami te rupamaisvaram purusottama
SYNONYMS
evam--that; etat--this; yatha--as it is; attha--have spoken; tvam--You;
atmanam--the soul; parama-isvara--the Supreme Lord; drastum--to see;icchami--I wish; te--You; rupam--form; aisvaram--divine; purusa-uttama--O best of personalities.
TRANSLATIONO greatest of all personalities, O supreme form, though I see here
before me Your actual position, I wish to see how You have entered intothis cosmic manifestation. I want to see that form of Yours.
PURPORTThe Lord said that because He entered into the material universe by His
personal representation, the cosmic manifestation has been madepossible and is going on. Now as far as Arjuna is concerned, he isinspired by the statements of Krsna, but in order to convince others inthe future who may think that Krsna is an ordinary person, he desiresto see Him actually in His universal form, to see how He is acting fromwithin the universe, although He is apart from it. Arjuna's asking theLord's permission is also significant. Since the Lord is the SupremePersonality of Godhead, He is present within Arjuna himself; thereforeHe knows the desire of Arjuna, and He can understand that Arjuna has nospecial desire to see Him in His universal form, for he is completelysatisfied to see Him in His personal form of Krsna. But He canunderstand also that Arjuna wants to see the universal form to convinceothers. He did not have any personal desire for confirmation. Krsnaalso understands that Arjuna wants to see the universal form to set acriterion, for in the future there would be so many imposters who wouldpose themselves as incarnations of God. The people, therefore, shouldbe careful; one who claims to be Krsna should be prepared to show hisuniversal form to confirm his claim to the people.
TEXT 4
manyase yadi tac chakyam
maya drastum iti prabhoyogesvara tato me tvamdarsayatmanam avyayam
SYNONYMSmanyase--if You think; yadi--if; tat--that; sakyam--able to see; maya--
by me; drastum--to see; iti--thus; prabho--O Lord; yoga-isvara--O Lordof all mystic power; tatah--then; me--unto me; tvam--You; darsaya--show; atmanam--Yourself; avyayam--eternal.
TRANSLATIONIf You think that I am able to behold Your cosmic form, O my Lord, O
master of all mystic power, then kindly show me that universal Self.
PURPORTIt is said that one can neither see, hear, understand nor perceive the
Supreme Lord, Krsna, by the material senses. But if one is engaged inloving transcendental service to the Lord from the beginning, then one
can see the Lord by revelation. Every living entity is only a spiritual
spark; therefore it is not possible to see or to understand the SupremeLord. Arjuna, as a devotee, does not depend on his speculativestrength; rather, he admits his limitations as a living entity andacknowledges Krsna's inestimable position. Arjuna could understand thatfor a living entity it is not possible to understand the unlimitedinfinite. If the infinite reveals Himself, then it is possible tounderstand the nature of the infinite by the grace of the infinite. Theword yogesvara is also very significant here because the Lord hasinconceivable power. If He likes, He can reveal Himself by His grace,although He is unlimited. Therefore Arjuna pleads for the inconceivablegrace of Krsna. He does not give Krsna orders. Krsna is not obliged toreveal Himself to anyone unless one surrenders fully in Krsnaconsciousness and engages in devotional service. Thus it is notpossible for persons who depend on the strength of their mentalspeculations to see Krsna.
TEXT 5
sri-bhagavan uvaca
pasya me partha rupanisataso 'tha sahasrasahnana-vidhani divyaninana-varnakrtini ca
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; pasya--
just see; me--Mine; partha--O son of Prtha; rupani--forms; satasah--hundreds; atha--also; sahasrasah--thousands; nana-vidhani--variegated;divyani--divine; nana--variegated; varna--colors; akrtini--forms; ca--also.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: My dear Arjuna, O son of Prtha, behold now My
opulences, hundreds of thousands of varied divine forms, multicoloredlike the sea.
PURPORTArjuna wanted to see Krsna in His universal form, which, although a
transcendental form, is just manifested for the cosmic manifestationand is therefore subject to the temporary time of this material nature.As the material nature is manifested and not manifested, similarly thisuniversal form of Krsna is manifested and nonmanifested. It is noteternally situated in the spiritual sky like Krsna's other forms. Asfar as a devotee is concerned, he is not eager to see the universalform, but because Arjuna wanted to see Krsna in this way, Krsna revealsthis form. This universal form is not possible to be seen by anyordinary man. Krsna must give one the power to see it.
TEXT 6
pasyadityan vasun rudran
asvinau marutas tathabahuny adrsta-purvanipasyascaryani bharata
SYNONYMS
pasya--see; adityan--the twelve sons of Aditi; vasun--the eight Vasus;
rudran--the eleven forms of Rudra; asvinau--the two Asvinis; marutah--the forty-nine Maruts (demigods of the wind); tatha--also; bahuni--many; adrsta--that you have not head or seen; purvani--before; pasya--there see; ascaryani--all the wonderful; bharata--O best of theBharatas.
TRANSLATIONO best of the Bharatas, see here the different manifestations of
Adityas, Rudras, and all the demigods. Behold the many things which noone has ever seen or heard before.
PURPORTEven though Arjuna was a personal friend of Krsna and the most advanced
of learned men, it was still not possible for him to know everythingabout Krsna. Here it is stated that humans have neither heard nor knownof all these forms and manifestations. Now Krsna reveals thesewonderful forms.
TEXT 7
ihaika-stham jagat krtsnam
pasyadya sa-caracarammama dehe gudakesayac canyad drastum icchasi
SYNONYMSiha--in this; eka-stham--in one; jagat--the universe; krtsnam--
completely; pasya--see; adya--immediately; sa--with; cara--moving;acaram--not moving; mama--My; dehe--in this body; gudakesa--O Arjuna;yat--that; ca--also; anyat--other; drastum--to see; icchasi--you like.
TRANSLATIONWhatever you wish to see can be seen all at once in this body. This
universal form can show you all that you now desire, as well aswhatever you may desire in the future. Everything is here completely.
PURPORTNo one can see the entire universe sitting in one place. Even the most
advanced scientist cannot see what is going on in other parts of theuniverse. But a devotee like Arjuna can see everything that exists inany part of the universe. Krsna gives him the power to see anything hewants to see, past, present and future. Thus by the mercy of Krsna,Arjuna is able to see everything.
TEXT 8
na tu mam sakyase drastum
anenaiva sva-caksusadivyam dadami te caksuh
pasya me yogam aisvaram
SYNONYMSna--never; tu--but; mam--Me; sakyase--able; drastum--to see; anena--by
this; eva--certainly; sva-caksusa--with your own eyes; divyam--divine;dadami--I give; te--you; caksuh--eyes; pasya--see; me--My; yogamaisvaram--inconceivable mystic power.
TRANSLATIONBut you cannot see Me with your present eyes. Therefore I give you
divine eyes by which you can behold My mystic opulence!
PURPORTA pure devotee does not like to see Krsna in any form except His form
with two hands; a devotee must see His universal form by His grace, notwith the mind but with spiritual eyes. To see the universal form ofKrsna, Arjuna is told not to change his mind but his vision. Theuniversal form of Krsna is not very important; that will be clear inthe verses. Yet because Arjuna wanted to see it, the Lord gives him theparticular vision required to see that universal form.Devotees who are correctly situated in a transcendental relationshipwith Krsna are attracted by loving features, not by a godless displayof opulences. The playmates of Krsna, the friends of Krsna and theparents of Krsna never want Krsna to show His opulences. They are soimmersed in pure love that they do not even know that Krsna is theSupreme Personality of Godhead. In their loving exchange they forgetthat Krsna is the Supreme Lord. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is statedthat the boys who play with Krsna are all highly pious souls, and aftermany, many births they are able to play with Krsna. Such boys do notknow that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They take Him asa personal friend. The Supreme Person is considered the impersonalBrahman by great sages, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead by thedevotees, and as a product of this material nature by ordinary men. Thefact is that the devotee is not concerned to see the visva-rupa, theuniversal form, but Arjuna wanted to see it to substantiate Krsna'sstatement so that in the future people could understand that Krsna notonly theoretically or philosophically presented Himself as the Supremebut actually presented Himself as such to Arjuna. Arjuna must confirmthis because Arjuna is the beginning of the parampara system. Those whoare actually interested to understanding the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, Krsna, and who follow in the footsteps of Arjuna shouldunderstand that Krsna not only theoretically presented Himself as theSupreme, but actually revealed Himself as the Supreme.The Lord gave Arjuna the necessary power to see His universal formbecause He knew that Arjuna did not particularly want to see it, as wehave already explained.
TEXT 9
sanjaya uvaca
evam uktva tato rajanmaha-yogesvaro harihdarsayam asa parthayaparamam rupam aisvaram
SYNONYMS
sanjayah uvaca--Sanjaya said; evam--thus; uktva--saying; tatah--
thereafter; rajan--O King; maha-yoga-isvarah--the most powerful mystic;harih--the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna; darsayam asa--showed;parthaya--unto Arjuna; paramam--divine; rupam--universal form;aisvaram--opulences.
TRANSLATIONSanjaya said: O King, speaking thus, the Supreme, the Lord of all
mystic power, the Personality of Godhead, displayed His universal formto Arjuna.
TEXTS 10-11
aneka-vaktra-nayanam
anekadbhuta-darsanamaneka-divyabharanamdivyanekodyatayudham
divya-malyambara-dharam
divya-gandhanulepanamsarvascarya-mayam devamanantam visvato-mukham
SYNONYMSaneka--various; vaktra--mouths; nayanam--eyes; aneka--various; adbhuta-
-wonderful; darsanam--sights; aneka--many; divya--divine; abharanam--ornaments; divya--divine; aneka--various; udyata--uplifted; ayudham--weapons; divya--divine; malya--garlands; ambara dharam--covered withthe dresses; divya--divine; gandha--fragrance; anulepanam--smeared;sarva--all; ascarya-mayam--wonderful; devam--shining; anantam--unlimited; visvatah-mukham--all-pervading.
TRANSLATIONArjuna saw in that universal form unlimited mouths and unlimited eyes.
It was all wondrous. The form was decorated with divine, dazzlingornaments and arrayed in many garbs. He was garlanded gloriously, andthere were many scents smeared over His body. All was magnificent, all-expanding, unlimited. This was seen by Arjuna.
PURPORTThese two verses indicate that there is no limit to the hands, mouths,
legs, etc., of the Lord. These manifestations are distributedthroughout the universe and are unlimited. By the grace of the Lord,Arjuna could see them while sitting in one place. That is due to theinconceivable potency of Krsna.
TEXT 12
divi surya-sahasrasya
bhaved yugapad utthitayadi bhah sadrsi sa syadbhasas tasya mahatmanah
SYNONYMS
divi--in the sky; surya--sun; sahasrasya--of many thousands; bhavet--
there were; yugapat--simultaneously; utthita--present; yadi--if; bhah--light; sadrsi--like that; sa--that; syat--may be; bhasah--effulgence;tasya--there is; maha-atmanah--of the great Lord.
TRANSLATIONIf hundreds of thousands of suns rose up at once into the sky, they
might resemble the effulgence of the Supreme Person in that universalform.
PURPORTWhat Arjuna saw was indescribable, yet Sanjaya is trying to give a
mental picture of that great revelation to Dhrtarastra. Neither Sanjayanor Dhrtarastra was present, but Sanjaya, by the grace of Vyasa, couldsee whatever happened. Thus he now compares the situation, as far as itcan be understood, to an imaginable phenomenon (i.e. thousands ofsuns).
TEXT 13
tatraika-stham jagat krtsnam
pravibhaktam anekadhaapasyad deva-devasyasarire pandavas tada
SYNONYMStatra--there; eka-stham--one place; jagat--universe; krtsnam--
completely; pravibhaktam--divided in; anekadha--many kinds; apasyat--could see; deva-devasya--of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarire--in the universal form; pandavah--Arjuna; tada--at that time.
TRANSLATIONAt that time Arjuna could see in the universal form of the Lord the
unlimited expansions of the universe situated in one place althoughdivided into many, many thousands.
PURPORTThe word tatra (there) is very significant. It indicates that both
Arjuna and Krsna were sitting on the chariot when Arjuna saw theuniversal form. Others on the battlefield could not see this formbecause Krsna gave the vision only to Arjuna. Arjuna could see in thebody of Krsna many thousands of universes. As we learn from Vedicscriptures, there are many universes and many planets. Some of them aremade of earth, some are made of gold, some are made of jewels, some arevery great, some are not so great, etc. Sitting on his chariot, Arjunacould see all these universes. But no one could understand what wasgoing on between Arjuna and Krsna.
TEXT 14
tatah sa vismayavisto
hrsta-roma dhananjayahpranamya sirasa devamkrtanjalir abhasata
SYNONYMStatah--thereafter; sah--he; vismaya-avistah--being overwhelmed with
wonder; hrsta-roma--with his bodily hairs standing on end due to hisgreat ecstasy; dhananjayah--Arjuna; pranamya--offering obeisances;sirasa--with the head; devam--to the Supreme Personality of Godhead;krta-anjalih--with folded hands; abhasata--began to say.
TRANSLATIONThen, bewildered and astonished, his hair standing on end, Arjuna began
to pray with folded hands, offering obeisances to the Supreme Lord.
PURPORTOnce the divine vision is revealed, the relationship between Krsna and
Arjuna changes immediately. Before, Krsna and Arjuna had a relationshipbased on friendship, but here, after the revelation, Arjuna is offeringobeisances with great respect, and with folded hands he is praying toKrsna. He is praising the universal form. Thus Arjuna's relationshipbecomes one of wonder rather than friendship. Great devotees see Krsnaas the reservoir of all relationships. In the scriptures there aretwelve basic kinds of relationships mentioned, and all of them arepresent in Krsna. It is said that He is the ocean of all therelationships exchanged between two living entities, between the gods,or between the Supreme Lord and His devotees.It is said that Arjuna was inspired by the relationship of wonder, andin that wonder, although he was by nature very sober, calm and quiet,he became ecstatic, his hair stood up, and he began to offer hisobeisances unto the Supreme Lord with folded hands. He was not, ofcourse, afraid. He was affected by the wonders of the Supreme Lord. Theimmediate context is wonder; his natural loving friendship wasoverwhelmed by wonder, and thus he reacted in this way.
TEXT 15
arjuna uvaca
pasyami devams tava deva dehesarvams tatha bhuta-visesa-sanghanbrahmanam isam kamalasana-sthamrsims ca sarvan uragams ca divyan
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; pasyami--I see; devan--all the demigods;
tava--Your; deva--O Lord; dehe--in the body; sarvan--all; tatha--also;bhuta--living entities; visesa-sanghan--specifically assembled;brahmanam--Lord Brahma; isam--Lord Siva; kamala-asana-stham--sitting onthe lotus flower; rsin--great sages; ca--also; sarvan--all; uragan--serpents; ca--also; divyan--divine.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: My dear Lord Krsna, I see assembled together in Your body
all the demigods and various other living entities. I see Brahmasitting on the lotus flower as well as Lord Siva and many sages anddivine serpents.
PURPORTArjuna sees everything in the universe; therefore he sees Brahma, who
is the first creature in the universe, and the celestial serpent uponwhich the Garbhodakasayi Visnu lies in the lower regions of theuniverse. This snake bed is called Vasuki. There are also other snakesknown as Vasuki. Arjuna can see from the Garbhodakasayi Visnu up to thetopmost part of the universe on the lotus-flower planet where Brahma,the first creature of the universe, resides. That means that from thebeginning to the end, everything could be seen by Arjuna sitting in oneplace on his chariot. This was possible by the grace of the SupremeLord, Krsna.
TEXT 16
aneka-bahudara-vaktra-netram
pasyami tvam sarvato 'nanta-rupamnantam na madhyam na punas tavadimpasyami visvesvara visva-rupa
SYNONYMSaneka--many; bahu--arms; udara--bellies; vaktra--mouths; netram--eyes;
pasyami--I see; tvam--unto You; sarvatah--from all sides; ananta-rupam--unlimited form; na antam--there is no end; na madhyam--there is nomiddle; na punah--nor again; tava--Your; adim--beginning; pasyami--Isee; visva-isvara--O Lord of the universe; visva-rupa--in the form ofthe universe.
TRANSLATIONO Lord of the universe, I see in Your universal body many, many forms--
bellies, mouths, eyes--expanded without limit. There is no end, thereis no beginning, and there is no middle to all this.
PURPORTKrsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead and is unlimited; thus
through Him everything could be seen.
TEXT 17
kiritinam gadinam cakrinam ca
tejo-rasim sarvato diptimantampasyami tvam durniriksyam samantaddiptanalarka-dyutim aprameyam
SYNONYMSkiritinam--with helmets; gadinam--with maces; cakrinam--with discs; ca-
-and; tejah-rasim--effulgence; sarvatah--all sides; dipti-mantam--glowing; pasyami--I see; tvam--You; durniriksyam--difficult to see;
samantat--spreading; dipta-anala--blazing fire; arka--sun; dyutim--
sunshine; aprameyam--immeasurable.
TRANSLATIONYour form, adorned with various crowns, clubs and discs, is difficult
to see because of its glaring effulgence, which is fiery andimmeasurable like the sun.
TEXT 18
tvam aksaram paramam veditavyam
tvam asya visvasya param nidhanamtvam avyayah sasvata-dharma-goptasanatanas tvam puruso mato me
SYNONYMStvam--You; aksaram--inexhaustible; paramam--supreme; veditavyam--to be
understood; tvam--You; asya--of this; visvasya--of the universe; param--supreme; nidhanam--basis; tvam--You are; avyayah--inexhaustible;sasvata-dharma-gopta--maintainer of the eternal religion; sanatanah--eternal; tvam--You; purusah--Supreme Personality; matah me--is myopinion.
TRANSLATIONYou are the supreme primal objective; You are the best in all the
universes; You are inexhaustible, and You are the oldest; You are themaintainer of religion, the eternal Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 19
anadi-madhyantam ananta-viryam
ananta-bahum sasi-surya-netrampasyami tvam dipta-hutasa-vaktramsva-tejasa visvam idam tapantam
SYNONYMSanadi--without beginning; madhya--without middle; antam--without end;
ananta--unlimited; viryam--glorious; ananta--unlimited; bahum--arms;sasi--moon; surya--sun; netram--eyes; pasyami--I see; tvam--You; dipta--blazing; hutasa-vaktram--fire coming out of Your mouth; sva-tejasa--byYour; visvam--this universe; idam--this; tapantam--heating.
TRANSLATIONYou are the origin without beginning, middle or end. You have
numberless arms, and the sun and moon are among Your great unlimitedeyes. By Your own radiance You are heating this entire universe.
PURPORTThere is no limit to the extent of the six opulences of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Here and in many other places there isrepetition, but according to the scriptures, repetition of the gloriesof Krsna is not a literary weakness. It is said that at a time of
bewilderment or wonder or of great ecstasy, statements are repeated
over and over. That is not a flaw.
TEXT 20
dyav a-prthivyor idam antaram hi
vyaptam tvayaikena disas ca sarvahdrstvadbhutam rupam ugram tavedamloka-trayam pravyathitam mahatman
SYNONYMSdyau--in outer space; a-prthivyoh--of the earth; idam--this; antaram--
in between; hi--certainly; vyaptam--pervaded; tvaya--by You; ekena--byone; disah--directions; ca--and; sarvah--all; drstva--by seeing;adbhutam--wonderful; rupam--form; ugram--terrible; tava--Your; idam--this; loka--planetary system; trayam--three; pravyathitam--perturbed;maha-atman--O great one.
TRANSLATIONAlthough You are one, You are spread throughout the sky and the planets
and all space between. O great one, as I behold this terrible form, Isee that all the planetary systems are perplexed.
PURPORTDyav a-prthivyoh (the space between heaven and earth) and loka-trayam
(the three worlds) are significant words in this verse because itappears that not only Arjuna saw this universal form of the Lord, butothers in other planetary systems also saw it. The vision was not adream. All whom were spiritually awake with the divine vision saw it.
TEXT 21
ami hi tvam sura-sangha visanti
kecid bhitah pranjalayo grnantisvastity uktva maharsi-siddha-sanghahstuvanti tvam stutibhih puskalabhih
SYNONYMSami--all those; hi--certainly; tvam--unto You; sura-sanghah--groups of
demigods; visanti--entering; kecit--some of them; bhitah--out of fear;pranjalayah--with folded hands; grnanti--offering prayers unto; svasti--all peace; iti--thus; uktva--speaking like that; maha-rsi--greatsages; siddha-sanghah--perfect sages; stuvanti--singing hymns; tvam--unto You; stutibhih--with prayers; puskalabhih--Vedic hymns.
TRANSLATIONAll the demigods are surrendering and entering into You. They are very
much afraid, and with folded hands they are singing the Vedic hymns.
PURPORT
The demigods in all the planetary systems feared the terrific
manifestation of the universal form and its glowing effulgence and soprayed for protection.
TEXT 22
rudraditya vasavo ye ca sadhya
visve 'svinau marutas cosmapas cagandharva-yaksasura-siddha-sanghaviksante tvam vismitas caiva sarve
SYNONYMSrudra--manifestations of Lord Siva; adityah--the Adityas; vasavah--the
Vasus; ye--all those; ca--and; sadhyah--the Sadhyas; visve--theVisvedevas; asvinau--the Asvini-kumaras; marutah--the Maruts; ca--and;usma-pah--the forefathers; ca--and; gandharva--of the Gandharvas;yaksa--the Yaksas; asura-siddha--the demons and the perfected demigods;sanghah--assemblies; viksante--are seeing; tvam--You; vismitah--inwonder; ca--also; eva--certainly; sarve--all.
TRANSLATIONThe different manifestations of Lord Siva, the Adityas, the Vasus, the
Sadhyas, the Visvedevas, the two Asvis, the Maruts, the forefathers andthe Gandharvas, the Yaksas, Asuras, and all perfected demigods arebeholding You in wonder.
TEXT 23
rupam mahat te bahu-vaktra-netram
maha-baho bahu-bahuru-padambahudaram bahu-damstra-karalamdrstva lokah pravyathitas tathaham
SYNONYMSrupam--form; mahat--very great; te--of You; bahu--many; vaktra--faces;
netram--eyes; maha-baho--O mighty-armed one; bahu--many; bahu--arms;uru--thighs; padam--legs; bahu-udaram--many bellies; bahu-damstra--manyteeth; karalam--horrible; drstva--seeing; lokah--all the planets;pravyathitah--perturbed; tatha--similarly; aham--I.
TRANSLATIONO mighty-armed one, all the planets with their demigods are disturbed
at seeing Your many faces, eyes, arms, bellies and legs and Yourterrible teeth, and as they are disturbed, so am I.
TEXT 24
nabhah-sprsam diptam aneka-varnam
vyattananam dipta-visala-netramdrstva hi tvam pravyathitantar-atmadhrtim na vindami samam ca visno
SYNONYMS
nabhah-sprsam--touching the sky; diptam--glowing; aneka--many; varnam--
color; vyatta--open; ananam--mouth; dipta--glowing; visala--very great;netram--eyes; drstva--by seeing; hi--certainly; tvam--You; pravyathita--perturbed; antah--within; atma--soul; dhrtim--steadiness; na--no;vindami--and have; samam--mental tranquillity; ca--also; visno--O LordVisnu.
TRANSLATIONO all-pervading Visnu, I can no longer maintain my equilibrium. Seeing
Your radiant colors fill the skies and beholding Your eyes and mouths,I am afraid.
TEXT 25
damstra-karalani ca te mukhani
drstvaiva kalanala-sannibhanidiso na jane na labhe ca sarmaprasida devesa jagan-nivasa
SYNONYMSdamstra--teeth; karalani--like that; ca--also; te--Your; mukhani--
faces; drstva--seeing; eva--thus; kala-anala--the fire of death;sannibhani--as if blazing; disah--directions; na jane--do not know; nalabhe--nor obtain; ca sarma--and grace; prasida--be pleased; deva-isa--O Lord of all lords; jagat-nivasa--refuge of the worlds.
TRANSLATIONO Lord of lords, O refuge of the worlds, please be gracious to me. I
cannot keep my balance seeing thus Your blazing deathlike faces andawful teeth. In all directions I am bewildered.
TEXTS 26-27
ami ca tvam dhrtarastrasya putrah
sarve sahaivavani-pala-sanghaihbhismo dronah suta-putras tathasausahasmadiyair api yodha-mukhyaih
vaktrani te tvaramana visanti
damstra-karalani bhayanakanikecid vilagna dasanantaresusandrsyante curnitair uttamangaih
SYNONYMSami--all those; ca--also; tvam--You; dhrtarastrasya--of Dhrtarastra;
putrah--sons; sarve--all; saha eva--along with; avani-pala--warriorkings; sanghaih--the groups; bhismah--Bhismadeva; dronah--Dronacarya;suta-putrah--Karna; tatha--also; asau--that; saha--with; asmadiyaih--our; api--also; yodha-mukhyaih--chief among the warriors; vaktrani--mouths; te--Your; tvaramanah--fearful; visanti--entering; damstra--teeth; karalani--terrible; bhayanakani--very fearful; kecit--some ofthem; vilagnah--being attacked; dasana-antaresu--between the teeth;sandrsyante--being seen; curnitaih--smashed; uttama-angaih--by thehead.
TRANSLATION
All the sons of Dhrtarastra along with their allied kings, and Bhisma,
Drona and Karna, and all our soldiers are rushing into Your mouths,their heads smashed by Your fearful teeth. I see that some are beingcrushed between Your teeth as well.
PURPORTIn a previous verse the Lord promised to show Arjuna things he would be
very interested in seeing. Now Arjuna sees that the leaders of theopposite party (Bhisma, Drona, Karna and all the sons of Dhrtarastra)and their soldiers and Arjuna's own soldiers are all being annihilated.This is an indication that Arjuna will emerge victorious in battle,despite heavy losses on both sides. It is also mentioned here thatBhisma, who is supposed to be unconquerable, will also be smashed. Soalso Karna. Not only will the great warriors of the other party likeBhisma be smashed, but some of the great warriors of Arjuna's sidealso.
TEXT 28
yatha nadinam bahavo 'mbu-vegah
samudram evabhimukha dravantitatha tavami nara-loka-viravisanti vaktrany abhivijvalanti
SYNONYMSyatha--as; nadinam--of the rivers; bahavah--many; ambu-vegah--waves of
the waters; samudram--ocean; eva--certainly; abhimukhah--towards;dravanti--gliding; tatha--similarly; tava--Your; ami--all those; nara-loka-virah--the kings of human society; visanti--entering; vaktrani--into the mouths; abhivijvalanti--blazing.
TRANSLATIONAs the rivers flow into the sea, so all these great warriors enter Your
blazing mouths and perish.
TEXT 29
yatha pradiptam jvalanam patanga
visanti nasaya samrddha-vegahtathaiva nasaya visanti lokastavapi vaktrani samrddha-vegah
SYNONYMSyatha--as; pradiptam--blazing; jvalanam--fire; patangah--moths;
visanti--enters; nasaya--destruction; samrddha--full; vegah--speed;tatha eva--similarly; nasaya--for destruction; visanti--entering;lokah--all people; tava--unto You; api--also; vaktrani--in the mouths;samrddha-vegah--with full speed.
TRANSLATION
I see all people rushing with full speed into Your mouths as moths dash
into a blazing fire.
TEXT 30
lelihyase grasamanah samantal
lokan samagran vadanair jvaladbhihtejobhir apurya jagat samagrambhasas tavograh pratapanti visno
SYNONYMSlelihyase--licking; grasamanah--devouring; samantat--from all
directions; lokan--people; samagran--completely; vadanaih--by themouth; jvaladbhih--with blazing; tejobhih--by effulgence; apurya--covering; jagat--the universe; samagram--all; bhasah--illuminating;tava--Your; ugrah--terrible; pratapanti--scorching; visno--O all-pervading Lord.
TRANSLATIONO Visnu, I see You devouring all people in Your flaming mouths and
covering the universe with Your immeasurable rays. Scorching theworlds, You are manifest.
TEXT 31
akhyahi me ko bhavan ugra-rupo
namo 'stu te deva-vara prasidavijnatum icchami bhavantam adyamna hi prajanami tava pravrttim
SYNONYMSakhyahi--please explain; me--unto me; kah--who; bhavan--You; ugra-
rupah--fierce form; namah astu--obeisances; te--unto You; deva-vara--the great one amongst the demigods; prasida--be gracious; vijnatum--just to know; icchami--I wish; bhavantam--You; adyam--the original; na--never; hi--certainly; prajanami--do I know; tava--Your; pravrttim--mission.
TRANSLATIONO Lord of lords, so fierce of form, please tell me who You are. I offer
my obeisances unto You; please be gracious to me. I do not know whatYour mission is, and I desire to hear of it.
TEXT 32
sri-bhagavan uvaca
kalo 'smi loka-ksaya-krt pravrddholokan samahartum iha pravrttahrte 'pi tvam na bhavisyanti sarveye 'vasthitah pratyanikesu yodhah
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Personality of Godhead said; kalah--time; asmi-
-I am; loka--the worlds; ksaya-krt--destroyer; pravrddhah--to engage;lokan--all people; samahartum--to destroy; iha--in this world;pravrttah--to engage; rte api--without even; tvam--you; na--never;bhavisyanti--will be; sarve--all; ye--who; avasthitah--situated; prati-anikesu--on the opposite side; yodhah--the soldiers.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: Time I am, destroyer of the worlds, and I have
come to engage all people. With the exception of you [the Pandavas],all the soldiers here on both sides will be slain.
PURPORTAlthough Arjuna knew that Krsna was his friend and the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, he was nonetheless puzzled by the various formsexhibited by Krsna. Therefore he asked further about the actual missionof this devastating force. It is written in the Vedas that the SupremeTruth destroys everything, even Brahma. As stated in the Katha Upanisad(1.2.25),
yasya brahma ca ksatram ca
ubhe bhavata odanahmrtyur yasyopasecanamka ittha veda yatra sah
Eventually all the brahmanas, ksatriyas and everyone else are devoured
by the Supreme. This form of the Supreme Lord is the all-devouringgiant, and here Krsna presents Himself in that form of all-devouringtime. Except for a few Pandavas, everyone who was present in thatbattlefield would be devoured by Him.TEXT 33
tasmat tvam uttistha yaso labhasva
jitva satrun bhunksva rajyam samrddhammayaivaite nihatah purvam evanimitta-matram bhava savya-sacin
SYNONYMStasmat--therefore; tvam--you; uttistha--get up; yasah--fame; labhasva--
gain; jitva--conquering; satrun--enemies; bhunksva--enjoy; rajyam--kingdom; samrddham--flourishing; maya--by Me; eva--certainly; ete--allthese; nihatah--already killed; purvam eva--by previous arrangement;nimitta-matram--just the cause; bhava--become; savya-sacin--OSavyasaci.
TRANSLATIONTherefore get up and prepare to fight. After conquering your enemies
you will enjoy a flourishing kingdom. They are already put to death byMy arrangement, and you, O Savyasaci, can be but an instrument in thefight.
PURPORT
Savya-sacin refers to one who can shoot arrows very expertly in the
field; thus Arjuna is addressed as an expert warrior capable ofdelivering arrows to kill his enemies. "Just become an instrument":nimitta-matram. This word is also very significant. The whole world ismoving according to the plan of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.Foolish persons who do not have sufficient knowledge think that natureis moving without a plan and all manifestations are but accidentalformations. There are many so-called scientists who suggest thatperhaps it was like this, or maybe like that, but there is no questionof "perhaps" and "maybe." There is a specific plan being carried out inthis material world. What is this plan? This cosmic manifestation is achance for the conditioned souls to go back to Godhead, back to home.As long as they have the domineering mentality which makes them try tolord it over material nature, they are conditioned. But anyone who canunderstand the plan of the Supreme Lord and cultivate Krsnaconsciousness is most intelligent. The creation and destruction of thecosmic manifestation are under the superior guidance of God. Thus theBattle of Kuruksetra was fought according to the plan of God. Arjunawas refusing to fight, but he was told that he should fight and at thesame time desire the Supreme Lord. Then he would be happy. If one is infull Krsna consciousness and if his life is devoted to Histranscendental service, he is perfect.
TEXT 34
dronam ca bhismam ca jayadratham ca
karnam tathanyan api yodha-viranmaya hatams tvam jahi ma vyathisthayudhyasva jetasi rane sapatnan
SYNONYMSdronam ca--also Drona; bhismam ca--also Bhisma; jayadratham ca--also
Jayadratha; karnam--also Karna; tatha--also; anyan--others; api--certainly; yodha-viran--great warriors; maya--by Me; hatan--alreadykilled; tvam--you; jahi--become victorious; ma--never; vyathisthah--bedisturbed; yudhyasva--just fight; jeta asi--just conquer; rane--in thefight; sapatnan--enemies.
TRANSLATIONTHe Blessed Lord said: All the great warriors--Drona, Bhisma,
Jayadratha, Karna--are already destroyed. Simply fight, and you willvanquish your enemies.
PURPORTEvery plan is made by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but He is so
kind and merciful to His devotees that He wants to give the credit toHis devotees who carry out His plan according to His desire. Lifeshould therefore move in such a way that everyone acts in Krsnaconsciousness and understands the Supreme Personality of Godheadthrough the medium of a spiritual master. The plans of the SupremePersonality of Godhead are understood by His mercy, and the plans ofthe devotees are as good as His plans. One should follow such plans andbe victorious in the struggle for existence.
TEXT 35
sanjaya uvaca
etac chrutva vacanam kesavasyakrtanjalir vepamanah kiritinamaskrtva bhuya evaha krsnamsa-gadgadam bhita-bhitah pranamya
SYNONYMSsanjayah uvaca--Sanjaya said; etat--thus; srutva--hearing; vacanam--
speech; kesavasya--of Krsna; krta-anjalih--with folded hands;vepamanah--trembling; kiriti--Arjuna; namaskrtva--offering obeisances;bhuyah--again; eva--also; aha krsnam--said unto Krsna; sa-gadgadam--faltering; bhita-bhitah--fearful; pranamya--offering obeisances.
TRANSLATIONSanjaya said to Dhrtarastra: O King, after hearing these words from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Arjuna trembled, fearfully offeredobeisances with folded hands and began, falteringly, to speak asfollows:
PURPORTAs we have already explained, because of the situation created by the
universal form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Arjuna becamebewildered in wonder; thus he began to offer his respectful obeisancesto Krsna again and again, and with faltering voice he began to pray,not as a friend, but as a devotee in wonder.
TEXT 36
arjuna uvaca
sthane hrsikesa tava prakirtyajagat prahrsyaty anurajyate caraksamsi bhitani diso dravantisarve namasyanti ca siddha-sanghah
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; sthane--rightly; hrsika-isa--O master of
all senses; tava--Your; prakirtya--glories; jagat--the entire world;prahrsyati--rejoicing; anurajyate--becoming attached; ca--and;raksamsi--the demons; bhitani--out of fear; disah--directions;dravanti--fleeing; sarve--all; namasyanti--offering respect; ca--also;siddha-sanghah--the perfect human beings.
TRANSLATIONO Hrsikesa, the world becomes joyful upon hearing Your name, and thus
everyone becomes attached to You. Although the perfected beings offerYou their respectful homage, the demons are afraid, and they flee hereand there. All this is rightly done.
PURPORTArjuna, after hearing from Krsna about the outcome of the Battle of
Kuruksetra, became an enlightened devotee of the Supreme Lord. He
admitted that everything done by Krsna is quite fit. Arjuna confirmed
that Krsna is the maintainer and the object of worship for the devoteesand the destroyer of the undesirables. His actions are equally good forall. Arjuna understood herein that when the Battle of Kuruksetra wasbeing concluded, in outer space there were present many demigods,siddhas, and the intelligentsia of the higher planets, and they wereobserving the fight because Krsna was present there. When Arjuna sawthe universal form of the Lord, the demigods took pleasure in it, butothers, who were demons and atheists, could not stand it when the Lordwas praised. Out of their natural fear of the devastating form of theSupreme Personality of Godhead, they fled. Krsna's treatment of thedevotees and the atheists is praised by Arjuna. In all cases a devoteeglorifies the Lord because he knows that whatever He does is good forall.
TEXT 37
kasmac ca te na nameran mahatman
gariyase brahmano 'py adi-kartreananta devesa jagan-nivasatvam aksaram sad-asat tat param yat
SYNONYMSkasmat--why; ca--also; te--unto You; na--not; nameran--offer proper
obeisances; maha-atman--O great one; gariyase--You are better than;brahmanah--Brahma; api--although; adi-kartre--the supreme creator;ananta--unlimited; deva-isa--God of the gods; jagat-nivasa--O refuge ofthe universe; tvam--You are; aksaram--imperishable; sat-asat--cause andeffect; tat param--transcendental; yat--because.
TRANSLATIONO great one, who stands above even Brahma, You are the original master.
Why should they not offer their homage up to You, O limitless one? Orefuge of the universe, You are the invincible source, the cause of allcauses, transcendental to this material manifestation.
PURPORTBy this offering of obeisances, Arjuna indicates that Krsna is
worshipable by everyone. He is all-pervading, and He is the Soul ofevery soul. Arjuna is addressing Krsna as mahatma, which means that Heis most magnanimous and unlimited. Ananta indicates that there isnothing which is not covered by the influence and energy of the SupremeLord, and devesa means that He is the controller of all demigods and isabove them all. He is the center of the whole universe. Arjuna alsothought that it was fitting that all the perfect living entities andall powerful demigods offer their respectful obeisances unto Himbecause no one is greater than Him. He especially mentions that Krsnais greater than Brahma because Brahma is created by Him. Brahma is bornout of the lotus stem grown from the navel abdomen of GarbhodakasayiVisnu, who is Krsna's plenary expansion; therefore Brahma and LordSiva, who is born of Brahma, and all other demigods must offer theirrespectful obeisances. Thus the Lord is respected by Lord Siva andBrahma and similar other demigods. The word aksaram is very significantbecause this material creation is subject to destruction but the Lordis above this material creation. He is the cause of all causes, and
being so, He is superior to all the conditioned souls within this
material nature as well as the material cosmic manifestation itself. Heis therefore the all-great Supreme.
TEXT 38
tvam adi-devah purusah puranas
tvam asya visvasya param nidhanamvettasi vedyam ca param ca dhamatvaya tatam visvam ananta-rupa
SYNONYMStvam--You; adi-devah--the original Supreme God; purusah--personality;
puranah--old; tvam--You; asya--this; visvasya--universe; param--transcendental; nidhanam--refuge; vetta--knower; asi--You are; vedyamca--and the knowable; param ca--and transcendental; dhama--refuge;tvaya--by You; tatam--pervaded; visvam--universe; ananta-rupa--unlimited form.
TRANSLATIONYou are the original Personality, the Godhead. You are the only
sanctuary of this manifested cosmic world. You know everything, and Youare all that is knowable. You are above the material modes O limitlessform! This whole cosmic manifestation is pervaded by You!
PURPORTEverything is resting on the Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore
He is the ultimate rest. Nidhanam means that everything, even theBrahman effulgence, rests on the Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsna.He is the knower of everything that is happening in this world, and ifknowledge has any end, He is the end of all knowledge; therefore He isthe known and the knowable. He is the object of knowledge because He isall-pervading. Because He is the cause in the spiritual world, He istranscendental. He is also the chief personality in the transcendentalworld.
TEXT 39
vayur yamo 'gnir varunah sasankah
prajapatis tvam prapitamahas canamo namas te 'stu sahasra-krtvahpunas ca bhuyo 'pi namo namas te
SYNONYMSvayuh--air; yamah--controller; agnih--fire; varunah--water; sasa-ankah-
-moon; prajapatih--Brahma; tvam--You; prapitamahah--grandfather; ca--also; namah--offering respects; namah te--again my respects unto You;astu--are being; sahasra-krtvah--a thousand times; punah ca--and again;bhuyah--again; api--also; namah--offer my respects; namah te--offeringmy respects unto You.
TRANSLATION
You are air, fire, water and You are the moon! You are the supreme
controller and the grandfather. Thus I offer my respectful obeisancesunto You a thousand times, and again and yet again!
PURPORTThe Lord is addressed here as air because the air is the most important
representation of all the demigods, being all-pervasive. Arjuna alsoaddresses Krsna as the grandfather because He is the father of Brahma,the first living creature in the universe.
TEXT 40
namah purastad atha prsthatas te
namo 'stu te sarvata eva sarvaananta-viryamita-vikramas tvamsarvam samapnosi tato 'si sarvah
SYNONYMSnamah--offering obeisances; purastat--from the front; atha--also;
prsthatah--from behind; te--You; namah astu--offer my respects; te--unto You; sarvatah--from all sides; eva sarva--because You areeverything; ananta-virya--unlimited potency; amita-vikramah--unlimitedforce; tvam--You; sarvam--everything; samapnosi--cover; tatah asi--therefore You are; sarvah--everything.
TRANSLATIONObeisances from the front, from behind and from all sides! O unbounded
power, You are the master of limitless might! You are all-pervading,and thus You are everything!
PURPORTOut of loving ecstasy for Krsna, his friend, Arjuna is offering his
respects from all sides. He is accepting that He is the master of allpotencies and all prowess and far superior to all the great warriorsassembled on the battlefield. It is said in the Visnu Purana (1.9.69):
yo 'yam tavagato deva
samipam devata-ganahsa tvam eva jagat-srastayatah sarva-gato bhavan
"Whoever comes before You, be he a demigod, is created by You, O
Supreme Personality of Godhead."
TEXTS 41-42
sakheti matva prasabham yad uktam
he krsna he yadava he sakhetiajanata mahimanam tavedammaya pramadat pranayena vapi
yac cavahasartham asat-krto 'si
vihara-sayyasana-bhojanesueko 'tha vapy acyuta tat-samaksam
tat ksamaye tvam aham aprameyam
SYNONYMSsakha--friend; iti--thus; matva--thinking; prasabham--temporary; yat--
whatever; uktam--said; he krsna--O Krsna; he yadava--O Yadava; he sakheiti--O my dear friend; ajanata--without knowing; mahimanam--glories;tava--Your; idam--this; maya--by me; pramadat--out of foolishness;pranayena--out of love; va api--either; yat--whatever; ca--also;avahasa-artham--for joking; asat-krtah--dishonor; asi--have been done;vihara--in relaxation; sayya--in joking; asana--in a resting place;bhojanesu--or while eating together; ekah--alone; atha va--or; api--others; acyuta--O infallible one; tat-samaksam--as Your competitor;tat--all those; ksamaye--excuse; tvam--from You; aham--I; aprameyam--immeasurable.
TRANSLATIONI have in the past addressed You as "O Krsna," "O Yadava," "O my
friend," without knowing Your glories. Please forgive whatever I mayhave done in madness or in love. I have dishonored You many times whilerelaxing or while lying on the same bed or eating together, sometimesalone and sometimes in front of many friends. Please excuse me for allmy offenses.
PURPORTAlthough Krsna is manifested before Arjuna in His universal form,
Arjuna remembers his friendly relationship with Krsna and is thereforeasking pardon and requesting Him to excuse him for the many informalgestures which arise out of friendship. He is admitting that formerlyhe did not know that Krsna could assume such a universal form, althoughKrsna explained it as his intimate friend. Arjuna did not know how manytimes he may have dishonored Krsna by addressing Him "O my friend," "OKrsna," "O Yadava," etc., without acknowledging His opulence. But Krsnais so kind and merciful that in spite of such opulence He played withArjuna as a friend. Such is the transcendental loving reciprocationbetween the devotee and the Lord. The relationship between the livingentity and Krsna is fixed eternally; it cannot be forgotten, as we cansee from the behavior of Arjuna. Although Arjuna has seen the opulencein the universal form, he cannot forget his friendly relationship withKrsna.
TEXT 43
pitasi lokasya caracarasya
tvam asya pujyas ca gurur gariyanna tvat-samo 'sty abhyadhikah kuto 'nyoloka-traye 'py apratima-prabhava
SYNONYMSpita--father; asi--You are; lokasya--of all the world; cara--moving;
acarasya--nonmoving; tvam--You are; asya--of this; pujyah--worshipable;ca--also; guruh--master; gariyan--glorious; na--never; tvat-samah--equal to You; asti--there is; abhyadhikah--greater; kutah--how is itpossible; anyah--other; loka-traye--in three planetary systems; api--also; apratima--immeasurable; prabhava--power.
TRANSLATION
You are the father of this complete cosmic manifestation, the
worshipable chief, the spiritual master. No one is equal to You, norcan anyone be one with You. Within the three worlds, You areimmeasurable.
PURPORTThe Lord Krsna is worshipable as a father is worshipable for his son.
He is the spiritual master because He originally gave the Vedicinstructions to Brahma, and presently He is also instructing Bhagavad-gita to Arjuna; therefore He is the original spiritual master, and anybona fide spiritual master at the present moment must be a descendantin the line of disciplic succession stemming from Krsna. Without beinga representative of Krsna, one cannot become a teacher or spiritualmaster of transcendental subject matter.The Lord is being paid obeisances in all respects. He is ofimmeasurable greatness. No one can be greater than the SupremePersonality of Godhead, Krsna, because no one is equal to or higherthan Krsna within any manifestation, spiritual or material. Everyone isbelow Him. No one can excel Him.The Supreme Lord, Krsna, has senses and a body like the ordinary man,but for Him there is no difference between His senses, body, mind andHimself. Foolish persons who do not know Him perfectly say that Krsnais different from His soul, mind, heart and everything else. Krsna isabsolute; therefore His activities and potencies are supreme. It isalso stated that He does not have senses like ours. He can perform allsensual activities; therefore His senses are neither imperfect norlimited. No one can be greater than Him, no one can be equal to Him,and everyone is lower than Him.Whoever knows His transcendental body, activities and perfection, afterquitting his body, returns to Him and doesn't come back again to thismiserable world. Therefore one should know that Krsna's activities aredifferent from others. The best policy is to follow the principles ofKrsna; that will make one perfect. It is also stated that there is noone who is master of Krsna; everyone is His servant. The Caitanya-caritamrta (Adi 5.142) confirms, ekale isvara krsna, ara saba bhrtya:only Krsna is God, and everyone else is His servant. Everyone iscomplying with His order. There is no one who can deny His order.Everyone is acting according to His direction, being under Hissuperintendence. As stated in the Brahma-samhita, He is the cause ofall causes.
TEXT 44
tasmat pranamya pranidhaya kayam
prasadaye tvam aham isam idyampiteva putrasya sakheva sakhyuhpriyah priyayarhasi deva sodhum
SYNONYMStasmat--therefore; pranamya--after offering obeisances; pranidhaya--
laying down; kayam--body; prasadaye--to beg mercy; tvam--unto You;aham--I; isam--unto the Supreme Lord; idyam--who is worshipable; pitaiva--like a father; putrasya--of a son; sakha iva--like a friend;
sakhyuh--of a friend; priyah--lover; priyayah--of the dearmost; arhasi-
-You should; deva--my Lord; sodhum--tolerate.
TRANSLATIONYou are the Supreme Lord, to be worshiped by every living being. Thus I
fall down to offer You my respects and ask Your mercy. Please toleratethe wrongs that I may have done to You and bear with me as a fatherwith his son, or a friend with his friend, or a lover with his beloved.
PURPORTKrsna's devotees relate to Krsna in various relationships; one might
treat Krsna as a son, one might treat Krsna as a husband, as a friend,as a master, etc. Krsna and Arjuna are related in friendship. As thefather tolerates, or the husband or master tolerates, so Krsnatolerates.
TEXT 45
adrsta-purvam hrsito 'smi drstva
bhayena ca pravyathitam mano metad eva me darsaya deva rupamprasida devesa jagan-nivasa
SYNONYMSadrsta-purvam--never seen before; hrsitah--gladdened; asmi--I am;
drstva--by seeing; bhayena--out of fear; ca--also; pravyathitam--perturbed; manah--mind; me--my; tat--therefore; eva--certainly; me--unto me; darsaya--show; deva--O Lord; rupam--the form; prasida--just begracious; deva-isa--O Lord of lords; jagat-nivasa--the refuge of theuniverse.
TRANSLATIONAfter seeing this universal form, which I have never seen before, I am
gladdened, but at the same time my mind is disturbed with fear.Therefore please bestow Your grace upon me and reveal again Your formas the Personality of Godhead, O Lord of lords, O abode of theuniverse.
PURPORTArjuna is always in confidence with Krsna because he is a very dear
friend, and as a dear friend is gladdened by his friend's opulence,Arjuna is very joyful to see that his friend, Krsna, is the SupremePersonality of Godhead and can show such a wonderful universal form.But at the same time, after seeing that universal form, he is afraidthat he has committed so many offenses to Krsna out of his unalloyedfriendship. Thus his mind is disturbed out of fear, although he had noreason to fear. Arjuna therefore is asking Krsna to show His Narayanaform because He can assume any form. This universal form is materialand temporary, as the material world is temporary. But in the Vaikunthaplanets He has His transcendental form with four hands as Narayana.There are innumerable planets in the spiritual sky, and in each of themKrsna is present by His plenary manifestations of different names. ThusArjuna desired to see one of the forms manifest in the Vaikuntha
planets. Of course in each Vaikuntha planet the form of Narayana is
four-handed, and the four hands hold different arrangements of symbols--the conchshell, mace, lotus and disc. According to the different handsthese four things are held in, the Narayanas are named. All of theseforms are one and the same to Krsna; therefore Arjuna requests to seeHis four-handed feature.
TEXT 46
kiritinam gadinam cakra-hastam
icchami tvam drastum aham tathaivatenaiva rupena catur-bhujenasahasra-baho bhava visva-murte
SYNONYMSkiritinam--with helmet; gadinam--with club; cakra-hastam--disc in hand;
icchami--I wish; tvam--You; drastum--to see; aham--I; tatha eva--inthat position; tena eva--by that; rupena--with form; catuh-bhujena--four-handed; sahasra-baho--O thousand-handed one; bhava--just become;visva-murte--O universal form.
TRANSLATIONO universal Lord, I wish to see You in Your four-armed form, with
helmeted head and with club, wheel, conch and lotus flower in Yourhands. I long to see You in that form.
PURPORTIn the Brahma-samhita (5.39) it is stated, ramadi-murtisu kala-niyamena
tisthan: the Lord is eternally situated in hundreds and thousands offorms, and the main forms are those like Rama, Nrsimha, Narayana, etc.There are innumerable forms. But Arjuna knew that Krsna is the originalPersonality of Godhead assuming His temporary universal form. He is nowasking to see the form of Narayana, a spiritual form. This verseestablishes without any doubt the statement of the Srimad-Bhagavatamthat Krsna is the original Personality of Godhead and all otherfeatures originate from Him. He is not different from His plenaryexpansions, and He is God in any of His innumerable forms. In all ofthese forms He is fresh like a young man. That is the constant featureof the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One who knows Krsna at oncebecomes free from all contamination of the material world.
TEXT 47
sri-bhagavan uvaca
maya prasannena tavarjunedamrupam param darsitam atma-yogattejo-mayam visvam anantam adyamyan me tvad anyena na drsta-purvam
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; maya--by
Me; prasannena--happily; tava--unto you; arjuna--O Arjuna; idam--this;rupam--form; param--transcendental; darsitam--shown; atma-yogat--by Myinternal potency; tejah-mayam--full of effulgence; visvam--the entire
universe; anantam--unlimited; adyam--original; yat me--that which is
Mine; tvat anyena--besides you; na drsta-purvam--no one has previouslyseen.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: My dear Arjuna, happily do I show you this
universal form within the material world by My internal potency. No onebefore you has ever seen this unlimited and glaringly effulgent form.
PURPORTArjuna wanted to see the universal form of the Supreme Lord, so out of
His mercy upon His devotee Arjuna, Lord Krsna showed him His universalform full of effulgence and opulence. This form was glaring like thesun, and its many faces were rapidly changing. Krsna showed this formjust to satisfy the desire of His friend Arjuna. This form wasmanifested by Krsna through His internal potency, which isinconceivable by human speculation. No one had seen this universal formof the Lord before Arjuna, but because the form was shown to Arjuna,other devotees in the heavenly planets and in other planets in outerspace could also see it. They did not seen it before, but because ofArjuna they were able to see it. In other words, all the disciplicdevotees of the Lord could see the universal form which was shown toArjuna by the mercy of Krsna. Someone commented that this form wasshown to Duryodhana also when Krsna went to Duryodhana to negotiate forpeace. Unfortunately, Duryodhana did not accept the peace offer, but atthat time Krsna manifested some of His universal forms. But those formsare different from this one shown to Arjuna. It is clearly said that noone has ever seen this form before.
TEXT 48
na veda-yajnadhyayanair na danair
na ca kriyabhir na tapobhir ugraihevam-rupah sakya aham nr-lokedrastum tvad anyena kuru-pravira
SYNONYMSna--never; veda--Vedic study; yajna--sacrifice; adhyayanaih--study; na
danaih--by charity; na--never; ca--also; kriyabhih--by piousactivities; na tapobhih--by serious penances; ugraih--severe; evam--thus; rupah--form; sakyah--can be seen; aham--I; nr-loke--in thismaterial world; drastum--to see; tvat--you; anyena--by another; kuru-pravira--O best among the Kuru warriors.
TRANSLATIONO best of the Kuru warriors, no one before you has ever seen this
universal form of Mine, for neither by studying the Vedas, nor byperforming sacrifices, nor by charities or similar activities can thisform be seen. Only you have seen this.
PURPORTThe divine vision in this connection should be clearly understood. Who
can have divine vision? Divine means godly. Unless one attains the
status of divinity as a demigod, he cannot have divine vision. And what
is a demigod? It is stated in the Vedic scriptures that those who aredevotees of Lord Visnu are demigods (visnu-bhaktah smrta devah). Thosewho are atheistic, i.e., who do not believe in Visnu, or who onlyrecognize the impersonal part of Krsna as the Supreme, cannot have thedivine vision. It is not possible to decry Krsna and at the same timehave the divine vision. One cannot have the divine vision withoutbecoming divine. In other words, those who have divine vision can alsosee like Arjuna.The Bhagavad-gita gives the description of the universal form, and thisdescription was unknown to everyone before Arjuna. Now one can havesome idea of the visva-rupa after this incident; those who are actuallydivine can see the universal form of the Lord. But one cannot be divinewithout being a pure devotee of Krsna. The devotees, however, who areactually in the divine nature and who have divine vision, are not verymuch interested to see the universal form of the Lord. As described inthe previous verse, Arjuna desired to see the four-handed form of LordKrsna as Visnu, and he was actually afraid of the universal form.In this verse there are some significant words, like veda-yajnadhyayanaih, which refers to studying Vedic literature and thesubject matter of sacrificial regulations. Veda refers to all kinds ofVedic literature, namely the four Vedas (Rg, Yajur, Sama and Atharva)and the eighteen Puranas, the Upanisads and the Vedanta-sutra. One canstudy these at home or anywhere else. Similarly, there are sutras--Kalpa-sutras and Mimamsa-sutras--for studying the method of sacrifice.Danaih refers to charity which is offered to a suitable party, such asthose who are engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord--the brahmanas and the Vaisnavas. Similarly, "pious activities" refersto the agni-hotra and the prescribed duties of the different castes.And the voluntary acceptance of some bodily pains is called tapasya. Soone can perform all these, can accept bodily penances, give charity,study the Vedas, etc., but unless he is a devotee like Arjuna, it isnot possible to see that universal form. Those who are impersonalistsare also imagining that they are seeing the universal form of the Lord,but from Bhagavad-gita we understand that the impersonalists are notdevotees. Therefore they are unable to see the universal form of theLord.There are many persons who create incarnations. They falsely claim anordinary human being to be an incarnation, but all this is foolishness.We should follow the principles of Bhagavad-gita, otherwise there is nopossibility of attaining perfect spiritual knowledge. AlthoughBhagavad-gita is considered the preliminary study of the science ofGod, still it is so perfect that one can distinguish what is what. Thefollowers of a pseudo incarnation may say that they have also seen thetranscendental incarnation of God, the universal form, but that is notacceptable because it is clearly stated here that unless one becomes adevotee of Krsna, one cannot see the universal form of God. So onefirst of all has to become a pure devotee of Krsna; then he can claimthat he can show the universal form of what he has seen. A devotee ofKrsna cannot accept false incarnations or followers of falseincarnations.
TEXT 49
ma te vyatha ma ca vimudha-bhavo
drstva rupam ghoram idrn mamedamvyapeta-bhih prita-manah punas tvamtad eva me rupam idam prapasya
SYNONYMS
ma--let it not be; te--unto you; vyatha--trouble; ma--let it not be;
ca--also; vimudha-bhavah--bewilderment; drstva--by seeing; rupam--form;ghoram--horrible; idrk--like this; mama--My; idam--as it is; vyapeta-bhih--just become free from all fear; prita-manah--be pleased in mind;punah--again; tvam--you; tat--that; eva--thus; me--My; rupam--form;idam--this; prapasya--just see.
TRANSLATIONYour mind has been perturbed upon seeing this horrible feature of Mine.
Now let it be finished. My devotee, be free from all disturbance. Witha peaceful mind you can now see the form you desire.
PURPORTIn the beginning of Bhagavad-gita Arjuna was worried about killing
Bhisma and Drona, his worshipful grandfather and master. But Krsna saidthat he need not be afraid of killing his grandfather. When they triedto disrobe Draupadi in the assembly, Bhisma and Drona were silent, andfor such negligence of duty they should be killed. Krsna showed Hisuniversal form to Arjuna just to show him that these people werealready killed for their unlawful action. That scene was shown toArjuna because devotees are always peaceful, and they cannot performsuch horrible actions. The purpose of the revelation of the universalform was shown; now Arjuna wanted to see the four-armed form, and Krsnashowed him. A devotee is not much interested in the universal form, forit does not enable one to reciprocate loving feelings. A devotee wantsto offer his respectful worshiping feelings; thus he wants to see thetwo-handed or four-handed Krsna form so he can reciprocate in lovingservice with the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 50
sanjaya uvaca
ity arjunam vasudevas tathoktvasvakam rupam darsayam asa bhuyahasvasayam asa ca bhitam enambhutva punah saumya-vapur mahatma
SYNONYMSsanjayah uvaca--Sanjaya said; iti--thus; arjunam--unto Arjuna;
vasudevah--Krsna; tatha--that way; uktva--saying; svakam--His own;rupam--form; darsayam asa--showed; bhuyah--again; asvasayam asa--alsoconvinced him; ca--also; bhitam--fearful; enam--him; bhutva punah--becoming again; saumya-vapuh--beautiful form; maha-atma--the great one.
TRANSLATIONSanjaya said to Dhrtarastra: The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna,
while speaking thus to Arjuna, displayed His real four-armed form, andat last He showed him His two-armed form, thus encouraging the fearfulArjuna.
PURPORT
When Krsna appeared as the son of Vasudeva and Devaki, He first of all
appeared as four-armed Narayana, but when He was requested by Hisparents, He transformed Himself into an ordinary child in appearance.Similarly, Krsna knew that Arjuna was not interested in seeing a four-handed form of Krsna, but since he asked to see this four-handed form,He also showed him this form again and then showed Himself in His two-handed form. The word saumya-vapuh is very significant. Saumya-vapuh isa very beautiful form; it is known as the most beautiful form. When Hewas present, everyone was attracted simply by Krsna's form, and becauseKrsna is director of the universe, He just banished the fear of Arjuna,His devotee, and showed him again His beautiful form of Krsna. In theBrahma-samhita (5.38) it is stated, premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena: only a person whose eyes are smeared with the ointment oflove can see the beautiful form of Sri Krsna.
TEXT 51
arjuna uvaca
drstvedam manusam rupamtava saumyam janardanaidanim asmi samvrttahsa-cetah prakrtim gatah
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; drstva--seeing; idam--this; manusam--human
being; rupam--form; tava--Your; saumyam--very beautiful; janardana--Ochastiser of the enemies; idanim--just now; asmi--I am; samvrttah--settled; sa-cetah--in my consciousness; prakrtim--my own; gatah--I am.
TRANSLATIONWhen Arjuna thus saw Krsna in His original form, he said: Seeing this
humanlike form, so very beautiful, my mind is now pacified and I amrestored to my original nature.
PURPORTHere the words manusam rupam clearly indicate the Supreme Personality
of Godhead to be originally two-handed. Those who deride Krsna to be anordinary person are shown here to be ignorant of His divine nature. IfKrsna is like an ordinary human being, then how is it possible for Himto show the universal form and again to show the four-handed Narayanaform? So it is very clearly stated in Bhagavad-gita that one who thinksthat Krsna is an ordinary person and misguides the reader by claimingthat it is the impersonal Brahman within Krsna speaking, is doing thegreatest injustice. Krsna has actually shown His universal form and Hisfour-handed Visnu form. So how can He be an ordinary human being? Apure devotee is not confused by misguiding commentaries on Bhagavad-gita because he knows what is what. The original verses of Bhagavad-gita are as clear as the sun; they do not require lamp-light fromfoolish commentators.
TEXT 52
sri-bhagavan uvaca
su-durdarsam idam rupam
drstavan asi yan mama
deva apy asya rupasyanityam darsana-kanksinah
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; su-
durdarsam--very difficult to be seen; idam--this; rupam--form; drstavanasi--as you have seen; yat--which; mama--of Mine; devah--the demigods;api asya--also this; rupasya--form; nityam--eternally; darsana-kanksinah--always aspire to see.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: My dear Arjuna, the form which you are now
seeing is very difficult to behold. Even the demigods are ever seekingthe opportunity to see this form which is so dear.
PURPORTIn the forty-eighth verse of this chapter Lord Krsna concluded
revealing His universal form and informed Arjuna that this form is notpossible to be seen by so many activities, sacrifices, etc. Now herethe word su-durdarsam is used, indicating that Krsna's two-handed formis still more confidential. One may be able to see the universal formof Krsna by adding a little tinge of devotional service to variousactivities like penance, Vedic study and philosophical speculation,etc. It may be possible, but without a tinge of bhakti, one cannot see;that has already been explained. Still, beyond that universal form, theform of Krsna as a two-handed man is still more difficult to see, evenfor demigods like Brahma and Lord Siva. They desire to see Him, and wehave evidence in the Srimad-Bhagavatam that when He was supposed to bein the womb of His mother, Devaki, all the demigods from heaven came tosee the marvel of Krsna. They even waited to see Him. A foolish personmay deride Him, but that is an ordinary person. Krsna is actuallydesired to be seen by demigods like Brahma and Siva in His two-armedform.In Bhagavad-gita (9.11) it is also confirmed, avajananti mam mudhamanusim tanum asritah: He is not visible to the foolish persons whoderide Him. Krsna's body, as confirmed by Brahma-samhita and confirmedby Krsna Himself in Bhagavad-gita, is completely spiritual and full ofbliss and eternality. His body is never like a material body. But forsome who make a study of Krsna by reading Bhagavad-gita or similarVedic scriptures, Krsna is a problem. For one using a material process,Krsna is considered to be a great historical personality and verylearned philosopher. But He isn't an ordinary man. But some think thateven though He was so powerful, He had to accept a material body.Ultimately they think that the Absolute Truth is impersonal; thereforethey think that from His impersonal feature He assumed a personalfeature attached to material nature. This is a materialisticcalculation of the Supreme Lord. Another calculation is speculative.Those who are in search of knowledge also speculate on Krsna andconsider Him to be less important than the universal form of theSupreme. Thus some think that the universal form of Krsna which wasmanifested to Arjuna is more important than His personal form.According to them, the personal form of the Supreme is somethingimaginary. They believe that in the ultimate issue, the Absolute Truthis not a person. But the transcendental process is described in
Bhagavad-gita, Chapter Two: to hear about Krsna from authorities. That
is the actual Vedic process, and those who are actually in the Vedicline hear about Krsna from authority, and by repeated hearing aboutHim, Krsna becomes dear. As we have several times discussed, Krsna iscovered by His yoga-maya potency. He is not to be seen or revealed toanyone and everyone. Only by one to whom He reveals Himself can He beseen. This is confirmed in Vedic literature; for one who is asurrendered soul, the Absolute Truth can actually be understood. Thetranscendentalist, by continuous Krsna consciousness and devotionalservice to Krsna, can have his spiritual eyes opened and can see Krsnaby revelation. Such a revelation is not possible even for the demigods;therefore it is difficult even for the demigods to understand Krsna inHis two-handed form. The conclusion is that although to see theuniversal form of Krsna is very, very difficult and not possible foranyone and everyone, it is still more difficult to understand Hispersonal form as Syamasundara.
TEXT 53
naham vedair na tapasa
na danena na cejyayasakya evam-vidho drastumdrstavan asi mam yatha
SYNONYMSna--never; aham--I; vedaih--by study of the Vedas; na--never; tapasa--
by serious penances; na--never; danena--by charity; na--never; ca--also; ijyaya--by worship; sakyah--it is possible; evam-vidhah--likethis; drastum--to see; drstavan--seeing; asi--you are; mam--Me; yatha--as.
TRANSLATIONThe form which you are seeing with your transcendental eyes cannot be
understood simply by studying the Vedas, nor by undergoing seriouspenances, nor by charity, nor by worship. It is not by these means thatone can see Me as I am.
PURPORTKrsna first appeared before His parents Devaki and Vasudeva in a four-
handed form, and then He transformed Himself into the two-handed form.This mystery is very difficult to understand for those who are atheistsor who are devoid of devotional service. For scholars who have simplystudied Vedic literature by way of speculation or mere academicinterest, Krsna is not easy to understand. Nor is He to be understoodby persons who officially go to the temple to offer worship. They maketheir visit, but they cannot understand Krsna as He is. Krsna can beunderstood only through the path of devotional service, as explained byKrsna Himself in the next verse.
TEXT 54
bhaktya tv ananyaya sakya
aham evam-vidho 'rjunajnatum drastum ca tattvenapravestum ca parantapa
SYNONYMS
bhaktya--by devotional service; tu--but; ananyaya--without being mixed
with fruitive activities or speculative knowledge; sakyah--possible;aham--I; evam-vidhah--like this; arjuna--O Arjuna; jnatum--to know;drastum--to see; ca--and; tattvena--in fact; pravestum--and to enterinto; ca--also; parantapa--O mighty-armed one.
TRANSLATIONMy dear Arjuna, only by undivided devotional service can I be
understood as I am, standing before you, and can thus be seen directly.Only in this way can you enter into the mysteries of My understanding.
PURPORTKrsna can be understood only by the process of undivided devotional
service. He explicitly explains this in this verse so unauthorizedcommentators, who try to understand Bhagavad-gita by the speculativeprocess, will know that they are simply wasting their time. No one canunderstand Krsna or how He came from parents in a four-handed form andat once changed Himself into a two-handed form. It is clearly statedhere that no one can see Him. Those who, however, are very experiencedstudents of Vedic literature can learn about Him from the Vedicliterature in so many ways. There are so many rules and regulations,and if one at all wants to understand Krsna, he must follow theregulative principles described in the authoritative literature. Onecan perform penance in accordance with those principles. As far ascharity is concerned, it is plain that charity should be given to thedevotees of Krsna who are engaged in His devotional service to spreadthe Krsna philosophy or Krsna consciousness throughout the world. Krsnaconsciousness is a benediction to humanity. Lord Caitanya wasappreciated by Rupa Gosvami as the most munificent man of charitybecause love of Krsna, which is very difficult to achieve, wasdistributed freely by Him. And if one worships as prescribed in thetemple (in the temples in India there is always some statue, usually ofVisnu or Krsna), that is a chance to progress by offering worship andrespect to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For the beginners indevotional service to the Lord, temple worship is essential, and thisis confirmed in the Vedic literature.One who has unflinching devotion for the Supreme Lord and is directedby the spiritual master, can see the Supreme Personality of Godhead byrevelation. For one who does not take personal training under theguidance of a bona fide spiritual master, it is impossible to evenbegin to understand Krsna. The word tu is specifically used here toindicate that no other process can be used, can be recommended, or canbe successful in understanding Krsna.The personal forms of Krsna, the two-handed form and the four-handed,are completely different from the temporary universal form shown toArjuna. The four-handed form is Narayana and the two-handed form isKrsna; they are eternal and transcendental, whereas the universal formexhibited to Arjuna is temporary. The very word sudurdarsam, meaningdifficult to see, suggests that no one saw that universal form. It alsosuggests that amongst the devotees there was no necessity of showingit. That form was exhibited by Krsna at the request of Arjuna becausein the future, when one represents himself as an incarnation of God,people can ask to see his universal form.
Krsna changes from the universal form to the four-handed form of
Narayana and then to His own natural form of two hands. This indicatesthat the four-handed forms and other forms mentioned in Vedicliterature are all emanations of the original two-handed Krsna. He isthe origin of all emanations. Krsna is distinct even from these forms,what to speak of the impersonal conception. As far as the four-handedforms of Krsna are concerned, it is stated clearly that even the mostidentical four-handed form of Krsna (which is known as Maha-Visnu, whois lying on the cosmic ocean and from whose breathing so manyinnumerable universes are passing out and entering) is also anexpansion of the Supreme Lord. Therefore one should conclusivelyworship the personal form of Krsna as the Supreme Personality ofGodhead who is eternity, bliss and knowledge. He is the source of allforms of Visnu, He is the source of all forms of incarnation, and He isthe original Supreme Personality, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gita.In the Vedic literature it is stated that the Supreme Absolute Truth isa person. His name is Krsna, and He sometimes descends on this earth.Similarly, in Srimad-Bhagavatam there is a description of all kinds ofincarnations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and there it issaid that Krsna is not an incarnation of God but is the originalSupreme Personality of Godhead Himself (krsnas tu bhagavan svayam).Similarly, in Bhagavad-gita the Lord says, mattah parataram nanyat:"There is nothing superior to My form as the Personality of GodheadKrsna." He also says elsewhere in Bhagavad-gita, aham adir hi devanam:"I am the origin of all the demigods." And after understandingBhagavad-gita from Krsna, Arjuna also confirms this in the followingwords: param brahma param dhama pavitram-paramam bhavan: "I now fullyunderstand that You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, theAbsolute Truth, and that You are the refuge of everything." Thereforethe universal form which Krsna showed to Arjuna is not the originalform of God. The original is the Krsna form. The universal form, withits thousands and thousands of heads and hands, is manifest just todraw the attention of those who have no love for God. It is not God'soriginal form.The universal form is not attractive for pure devotees, who are in lovewith the Lord in different transcendental relationships. The SupremeGodhead exchanges transcendental love in His original form of Krsna.Therefore to Arjuna, who was so intimately related with Krsna infriendship, this form of the universal manifestation was not pleasing;rather, it was fearful. Arjuna, who is a constant companion of Krsna's,must have had transcendental eyes; he was not an ordinary man.Therefore he was not captivated by the universal form. This form mayseem wonderful to persons who are involved in elevating themselves byfruitive activities, but to persons who are engaged in devotionalservice, the two-handed form of Krsna is the most dear.
TEXT 55
mat-karma-krn mat-paramo
mad-bhaktah sanga-varjitahnirvairah sarva-bhutesuyah sa mam eti pandava
SYNONYMSmat-karma-krt--engaged in doing My work; mat-paramah--considering Me
the Supreme; mat-bhaktah--engaged in My devotional service; sanga-varjitah--freed from the contamination of previous activities and
mental speculation; nirvairah--without an enemy; sarva-bhutesu--to
every living entity yah--one who; sah--he; mam--unto Me; eti--comes;pandava--O son of Pandu.
TRANSLATIONMy dear Arjuna, one who is engaged in My pure devotional service, free
from the contaminations of previous activities and from mentalspeculation, who is friendly to every living entity, certainly comes toMe.
PURPORTAnyone who wants to approach the supreme of all the Personalities of
Godhead, on the Krsnaloka planet in the spiritual sky, and beintimately connected with the Supreme Personality, Krsna, must takethis formula, as is stated by the Supreme Himself. Therefore, thisverse is considered to be the essence of Bhagavad-gita. The Bhagavad-gita is a book directed to the conditioned souls, who are engaged inthe material world with the purpose of lording it over nature and whodo not know of the real, spiritual life. The Bhagavad-gita is meant toshow how one can understand his spiritual existence and his eternalrelationship with the supreme spiritual personality and to teach onehow to go back home, back to Godhead. Now here is the verse whichclearly explains the process by which one can attain success in hisspiritual activity: devotional service.As far as work is concerned, one should transfer his energy entirely toKrsna conscious activities. No work should be done by any man except inrelationship to Krsna. This is called krsna-karma. One may be engagedin various activities, but one should not be attached to the result ofhis work, but the result should be done for Him. For example, one maybe engaged in business, but to transform that activity into Krsnaconsciousness, one has to do business for Krsna. If Krsna is theproprietor of the business, then Krsna should enjoy the profit of thebusiness. If a businessman is in possession of thousands and thousandsof dollars, and if he has to offer all this to Krsna, he can do it.This is work for Krsna. Instead of constructing a big building for hissense gratification, he can construct a nice temple for Krsna, and hecan install the Deity of Krsna and arrange for the Deity's service, asis outlined in the authorized books of devotional service. This is allkrsna-karma. One should not be attached to the result of his work, butthe result should be offered to Krsna. One should also accept asprasadam, food, the remnants of offerings to Krsna. If one constructs avery big building for Krsna and installs the Deity of Krsna, one is notprohibited from living there, but it is understood that the proprietorof the building is Krsna. That is called Krsna consciousness. If,however, one is not able to construct a temple for Krsna, one canengage himself in cleansing the temple of Krsna; that is also krsna-karma. One can cultivate a garden. Anyone who has land--in India, atleast, any poor man has a certain amount of land--can utilize that forKrsna by growing flowers to offer Him. One can sow tulasi plants,because tulasi leaves are very important, and Krsna has recommendedthis in Bhagavad-gita. Patram puspam phalam toyam. Krsna desires thatone offer Him either a leaf, or a flower, or fruit, or a little water--and He is satisfied. This leaf especially refers to the tulasi. So onecan sow tulasi and pour water on the plant. Thus, even the poorest mancan engage in the service of Krsna. These are some of the examples ofhow one can engage in working for Krsna.
The word mat-paramah refers to one who considers the association of
Krsna in His supreme abode to be the highest perfection of life. Such aperson does not wish to be elevated to the higher planets such as themoon or sun or heavenly planets, or even the highest planet of thisuniverse, Brahmaloka. He has no attraction for that. He is onlyattracted to being transferred to the spiritual sky. And even in thespiritual sky he is not satisfied with merging into the glowingbrahmajyoti effulgence, for he wants to enter into the highestspiritual planet, namely Krsnaloka, Goloka Vrndavana. He has fullknowledge of that planet, and therefore he is not interested in anyother. As indicated by the word mad-bhaktah, he fully engages indevotional service, specifically in the nine processes of devotionalengagement: hearing, chanting, remembering, worshiping, serving thelotus feet of the Lord, offering prayers, carrying out the orders ofthe Lord, making friends with Him, and surrendering everything to Him.One can engage in all nine devotional processes, or eight, or seven, orat least in one, and that will surely make one perfect.The term sanga-varjitah is very significant. One should disassociatehimself from persons who are against Krsna. Not only are the atheisticpersons against Krsna, but so also are those who are attracted tofruitive activities and mental speculation. Therefore the pure form ofdevotional service is described in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.1.11) asfollows:
anyabhilasita-sunyam
jnana-karmady-anavrtamanukulyena krsnanu-silanam bhaktir uttama
In this verse Srila Rupa Gosvami clearly states that if anyone wants to
execute unalloyed devotional service, he must be freed from all kindsof material contamination. He must be freed from the association ofpersons who are addicted to fruitive activities and mental speculation.When, freed from such unwanted association and from the contaminationof material desires, one favorably cultivates knowledge of Krsna, thatis called pure devotional service. Anukulyasya sankalpah pratikulyasyavarjanam (Hari-bhakti-vilasa 11.676). One should think of Krsna and actfor Krsna favorably, not unfavorably. Kamsa was an enemy of Krsna's.From the very beginning of Krsna's birth, he planned in so many ways tokill Him, and because he was always unsuccessful, he was alwaysthinking of Krsna. Thus while working, while eating and while sleeping,he was always Krsna conscious in every respect, but that Krsnaconsciousness was not favorable, and therefore in spite of his alwaysthinking of Krsna twenty-four hours a day, he was considered a demon,and Krsna at last killed him. Of course anyone who is killed by Krsnaattains salvation immediately, but that is not the aim of the puredevotee. The pure devotee does not even want salvation. He does notwant to be transferred even to the highest planet, Goloka Vrndavana.His only objective is to serve Krsna wherever he may be.A devotee of Krsna is friendly to everyone. Therefore it is said herethat he has no enemy (nirvairah). How is this? A devotee situated inKrsna consciousness knows that only devotional service to Krsna canrelieve a person from all the problems of life. He has personalexperience of this, and therefore he wants to introduce this system,Krsna consciousness, into human society. There are many examples inhistory of devotees of the Lord risking their lives for the spreadingof God consciousness. The favorite example is Lord Jesus Christ. He wascrucified by the nondevotees, but he sacrificed his life for spreading
