PURPORT
While observing the situation of his enemy, Arjuna stood up on the
chariot, but he was so afflicted with lamentation that he sat downagain, setting aside his bow and arrows. Such a kind and soft-heartedperson, in the devotional service of the Lord, is fit to receive self-knowledge.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the First Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Observing the Armies on the Battlefieldof Kuruksetra.
Chapter 2
Contents of the Gita Summarized
TEXT 1
sanjaya uvaca
tam tatha krpayavistamasru-purnakuleksanamvisidantam idam vakyamuvaca madhusudanah
SYNONYMSsanjayah uvaca--Sanjaya said; tam--unto Arjuna; tatha--thus; krpaya--by
compassion; avistam--overwhelmed; asru-purna--full of tears; akula--depressed; iksanam--eyes; visidantam--lamenting; idam--this; vakyam--words; uvaca--said; madhu-sudanah--the killer of Madhu.
TRANSLATIONSanjaya said: Seeing Arjuna full of compassion and very sorrowful, his
eyes brimming with tears, Madhusudana, Krsna, spoke the followingwords.
PURPORTMaterial compassion, lamentation and tears are all signs of ignorance
of the real self. Compassion for the eternal soul is self-realization.The word "Madhusudana" is significant in this verse. Lord Krsna killedthe demon Madhu, and now Arjuna wanted Krsna to kill the demon ofmisunderstanding that had overtaken him in the discharge of his duty.No one knows where compassion should be applied. Compassion for thedress of a drowning man is senseless. A man fallen in the ocean ofnescience cannot be saved simply by rescuing his outward dress--thegross material body. One who does not know this and laments for theoutward dress is called a sudra, or one who laments unnecessarily.Arjuna was a ksatriya, and this conduct was not expected from him. LordKrsna, however, can dissipate the lamentation of the ignorant man, andfor this purpose the Bhagavad-gita was sung by Him. This chapterinstructs us in self-realization by an analytical study of the materialbody and the spirit soul, as explained by the supreme authority, LordSri Krsna. This realization is made possible by working with thefruitive being situated in the fixed conception of the real self.
TEXT 2
sri-bhagavan uvaca
kutas tva kasmalam idamvisame samupasthitamanarya-justam asvargyamakirti-karam arjuna
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; kutah--
wherefrom; tva--unto you; kasmalam--dirtiness; idam--this lamentation;visame--in this hour of crisis; samupasthitam--arrived; anarya--personswho do not know the value of life; justam--practiced by; asvargyam--that which does not lead to higher planets; akirti--infamy; karam--thecause of; arjuna--O Arjuna.
TRANSLATIONThe Supreme Person [Bhagavan] said: My dear Arjuna, how have these
impurities come upon you? They are not at all befitting a man who knowsthe progressive values of life. They lead not to higher planets, but toinfamy.
PURPORTKrsna and the Supreme Personality of Godhead are identical. Therefore
Lord Krsna is referred to as "Bhagavan" throughout the Gita. Bhagavanis the ultimate in Absolute Truth. Absolute Truth is realized in threephases of understanding, namely Brahman, or the impersonal all-pervasive spirit; Paramatma, or the localized aspect of the Supremewithin the heart of all living entities; and Bhagavan, or the SupremePersonality of Godhead, Lord Krsna. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.11)this conception of the Absolute Truth is explained thus:
vadanti tat tattva-vidas
tattvam yaj jnanam advayambrahmeti paramatmetibhagavan iti sabdyate
"The Absolute Truth is realized in three phases of understanding by the
knower of the Absolute Truth, and all of them are identical. Suchphases of the Absolute Truth are expressed as Brahman, Paramatma, andBhagavan."These three divine aspects can be explained by the example of the sun,which also has three different aspects, namely the sunshine, the sun'ssurface and the sun planet itself. One who studies the sunshine only isthe preliminary student. One who understands the sun's surface isfurther advanced. And one who can enter into the sun planet is thehighest. Ordinary students who are satisfied simply by understandingthe sunshine--its universal pervasiveness and the glaring effulgence ofits impersonal nature--may be compared to those who can realize onlythe Brahman feature of the Absolute Truth. The student who has advancedstill further can know the sun disc, which is compared to knowledge ofthe Paramatma feature of the Absolute Truth. And the student who canenter into the heart of the sun planet is compared to those who realizethe personal features of the Supreme Absolute Truth. Therefore, thebhaktas, or the transcendentalists who have realized the Bhagavanfeature of the Absolute Truth, are the topmost transcendentalists,
although all students who are engaged in the study of the Absolute
Truth are engaged in the same subject matter. The sunshine, the sundisc and the inner affairs of the sun planet cannot be separated fromone another, and yet the students of the three different phases are notin the same category.The Sanskrit word bhagavan is explained by the great authority,Parasara Muni, the father of Vyasadeva. The Supreme Personality whopossesses all riches, all strength, all fame, all beauty, all knowledgeand all renunciation is called Bhagavan. There are many persons who arevery rich, very powerful, very beautiful, very famous, very learned,and very much detached, but no one can claim that he possesses allriches, all strength, etc., entirely. Only Krsna can claim this becauseHe is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. No living entity, includingBrahma, Lord Siva, or Narayana, can possess opulences as fully asKrsna. Therefore it is concluded in the Brahma-samhita by Lord Brahmahimself that Lord Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. No oneis equal to or above Him. He is the primeval Lord, or Bhagavan, knownas Govinda, and He is the supreme cause of all causes:
isvarah paramah krsnah
sac-cid-ananda-vigrahahanadir adir govindahsarva-karana-karanam
"There are many personalities possessing the qualities of Bhagavan, but
Krsna is the supreme because none can excel Him. He is the SupremePerson, and His body is eternal, full of knowledge and bliss. He is theprimeval Lord Govinda and the cause of all causes." (Brahma-samhita5.1)In the Bhagavatam also there is a list of many incarnations of theSupreme Personality of Godhead, but Krsna is described as the originalPersonality of Godhead, from whom many, many incarnations andPersonalities of Godhead expand:
ete camsa-kalah pumsah
krsnas tu bhagavan svayamindrari-vyakulam lokammrdayanti yuge yuge
"All the lists of the incarnations of Godhead submitted herewith are
either plenary expansions or parts of the plenary expansions of theSupreme Godhead, but Krsna is the Supreme Personality of GodheadHimself." (Bhag. 1.3.28)Therefore, Krsna is the original Supreme Personality of Godhead, theAbsolute Truth, the source of both the Supersoul and the impersonalBrahman.In the presence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Arjuna'slamentation for his kinsmen is certainly unbecoming, and thereforeKrsna expressed His surprise with the word kutas, "wherefrom." Suchunmanly sentiments were never expected from a person belonging to thecivilized class of men known as Aryans. The word Aryan is applicable topersons who know the value of life and have a civilization based onspiritual realization. Persons who are led by the material conceptionof life do not know that the aim of life is realization of the AbsoluteTruth, Visnu, or Bhagavan, and they are captivated by the externalfeatures of the material world, and therefore they do not know whatliberation is. Persons who have no knowledge of liberation frommaterial bondage are called non-Aryans. Although Arjuna was a ksatriya,
he was deviating from his prescribed duties by declining to fight. This
act of cowardice is described as befitting the non-Aryans. Suchdeviation from duty does not help one in the progress of spirituallife, nor does it even give one the opportunity to become famous inthis world. Lord Krsna did not approve of the so-called compassion ofArjuna for his kinsmen.
TEXT 3
klaibyam ma sma gamah partha
naitat tvayy upapadyateksudram hrdaya-daurbalyamtyaktvottistha parantapa
SYNONYMSklaibyam--impotence; ma--do not; sma--take it; gamah--go in; partha--O
son of Prtha; na--never; etat--like this; tvayi--unto you; upadyate--isbefitting; ksudram--very little; hrdaya--heart; daurbalyam--weakness;tyaktva--giving up; uttistha--get up; param-tapa--O chastiser of theenemies.
TRANSLATIONO son of Prtha, do not yield to this degrading impotence. It does not
become you. Give up such petty weakness of heart and arise, O chastiserof the enemy.
PURPORTArjuna was addressed as "the son of Prtha," who happened to be the
sister of Krsna's father Vasudeva. Therefore Arjuna had a bloodrelationship with Krsna. If the son of a ksatriya declines to fight, heis a ksatriya in name only, and if the son of a brahmana actsimpiously, he is a brahmana in name only. Such ksatriyas and brahmanasare unworthy sons of their fathers; therefore, Krsna did not wantArjuna to become an unworthy son of a ksatriya. Arjuna was the mostintimate friend of Krsna, and Krsna was directly guiding him on thechariot; but in spite of all these credits, if Arjuna abandoned thebattle, he would be committing an infamous act; therefore Krsna saidthat such an attitude in Arjuna did not fit his personality. Arjunamight argue that he would give up the battle on the grounds of hismagnanimous attitude for the most respectable Bhisma and his relatives,but Krsna considered that sort of magnanimity not approved byauthority. Therefore, such magnanimity or so-called nonviolence shouldbe given up by persons like Arjuna under the direct guidance of Krsna.
TEXT 4
arjuna uvaca
katham bhismam aham sankhyedronam ca madhusudanaisubhih pratiyotsyamipujarhav ari-sudana
SYNONYMS
arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; katham--how; bhismam--unto Bhisma; aham--I;
sankhye--in the fight; dronam--unto Drona; ca--also; madhu-sudana--Okiller of Madhu; isubhih--with arrows; pratiyotsyami--shallcounterattack; puja-arhau--those who are worshipable; ari-sudana--Okiller of the enemies.
TRANSLATIONArjuna said: O killer of Madhu [Krsna], how can I counterattack with
arrows in battle men like Bhisma and Drona, who are worthy of myworship?
PURPORTRespectable superiors like Bhisma the grandfather and Dronacarya the
teacher are always worshipable. Even if they attack, they should not becounterattacked. It is general etiquette that superiors are not to beoffered even a verbal fight. Even if they are sometimes harsh inbehavior, they should not be harshly treated. Then, how is it possiblefor Arjuna to counterattack them? Would Krsna ever attack His owngrandfather, Ugrasena, or His teacher, Sandipani Muni? These were someof the arguments by Arjuna to Krsna.
TEXT 5
gurun ahatva hi mahanubhavan
sreyo bhoktum bhaiksyam apiha lokehatvartha-kamams tu gurun ihaivabhunjiya bhogan rudhira-pradigdhan
SYNONYMSgurun--the superiors; ahatva--not killing; hi--certainly; maha-
anubhavan--great souls; sreyah--it is better; bhoktum--to enjoy life;bhaiksyam--begging; api--even; iha--in this life; loke--in this world;hatva--killing; artha--gain; kaman--so desiring; tu--but; gurun--superiors; iha--in this world; eva--certainly; bhunjiya--has to enjoy;bhogan--enjoyable things; rudhira--blood; pradigdhan--tainted with.
TRANSLATIONIt is better to live in this world by begging than to live at the cost
of the lives of great souls who are my teachers. Even though they areavaricious, they are nonetheless superiors. If they are killed, ourspoils will be tainted with blood.
PURPORTAccording to scriptural codes, a teacher who engages in an abominable
action and has lost his sense of discrimination is fit to be abandoned.Bhisma and Drona were obliged to take the side of Duryodhana because ofhis financial assistance, although they should not have accepted such aposition simply on financial considerations. Under the circumstances,they have lost the respectability of teachers. But Arjuna thinks thatnevertheless they remain his superiors, and therefore to enjoy materialprofits after killing them would mean to enjoy spoils tainted withblood.
TEXT 6
na caitad vidmah kataran no gariyo
yad va jayema yadi va no jayeyuhyan eva hatva na jijivisamaste 'vasthitah pramukhe dhartarastrah
SYNONYMSna--nor; ca--also; etat--this; vidmah--do know; katarat--which; nah--
us; gariyah--better; yat--what; va--either; jayema--conquer us; yadi--if; va--or; nah--us; jayeyuh--conquer; yan--those; eva--certainly;hatva--by killing; na--never; jijivisamah--want to live; te--all ofthem; avasthitah--are situated; pramukhe--in the front; dhartarastrah--the sons of Dhrtarastra.
TRANSLATIONNor do we know which is better--conquering them or being conquered by
them. The sons of Dhrtarastra, whom if we kill we should not care tolive, are now standing before us on this battlefield.
PURPORTArjuna did not know whether he should fight and risk unnecessary
violence, although fighting is the duty of the ksatriyas, or whether heshould refrain and live by begging. If he did not conquer the enemy,begging would be his only means of subsistence. Nor was there certaintyof victory, because either side might emerge victorious. Even ifvictory awaited them (and their cause was justified), still, if thesons of Dhrtarastra died in battle, it would be very difficult to livein their absence. Under the circumstances, that would be another kindof defeat for them. All these considerations by Arjuna definitelyproved that he was not only a great devotee of the Lord but he was alsohighly enlightened and had complete control over his mind and senses.His desire to live by begging, although he was born in the royalhousehold, is another sign of detachment. He was truly virtuous, asthese qualities, combined with his faith in the words of instruction ofSri Krsna (his spiritual master), indicate. It is concluded that Arjunawas quite fit for liberation. Unless the senses are controlled, thereis no chance of elevation to the platform of knowledge, and withoutknowledge and devotion there is no chance of liberation. Arjuna wascompetent in all these attributes, over and above his enormousattributes in his material relationships.
TEXT 7
karpanya-dosopahata-svabhavah
prcchami tvam dharma-sammudha-cetahyac chreyah syan niscitam bruhi tan mesisyas te 'ham sadhi mam tvam prapannam
SYNONYMSkarpanya--miserly; dosa--weakness; upahata--being inflicted by; sva-
bhavah--characteristics; prcchami--I am asking; tvam--unto You; dharma--religion; sammudha--bewildered; cetah--in heart; yat--what; sreyah--all-good; syat--may be; niscitam--confidently; bruhi--tell; tat--that;
me--unto me; sisyah--disciple; te--Your; aham--I am; sadhi--just
instruct; mam--me; tvam--unto You; prapannam--surrendered.
TRANSLATIONNow I am confused about my duty and have lost all composure because of
weakness. In this condition I am asking You to tell me clearly what isbest for me. Now I am Your disciple, and a soul surrendered unto You.Please instruct me.
PURPORTBy nature's own way the complete system of material activities is a
source of perplexity for everyone. In every step there is perplexity,and therefore it behooves one to approach a bona fide spiritual masterwho can give one proper guidance for executing the purpose of life. AllVedic literatures advise us to approach a bona fide spiritual master toget free from the perplexities of life which happen without our desire.They are like a forest fire that somehow blazes without being set byanyone. Similarly, the world situation is such that perplexities oflife automatically appear, without our wanting such confusion. No onewants fire, and yet it takes place, and we become perplexed. The Vedicwisdom therefore advises that in order to solve the perplexities oflife and to understand the science of the solution, one must approach aspiritual master who is in the disciplic succession. A person with abona fide spiritual master is supposed to know everything. One shouldnot, therefore, remain in material perplexities but should approach aspiritual master. This is the purport of this verse.Who is the man in material perplexities? It is he who does notunderstand the problems of life. In the Garga Upanisad the perplexedman is described as follows: yo va etad aksaram gargy aviditvasmallokat praiti sa krpanah. "He is a miserly man who does not solve theproblems of life as a human and who thus quits this world like the catsand dogs, without understanding the science of self-realization." Thishuman form of life is a most valuable asset for the living entity whocan utilize it for solving the problems of life; therefore, one whodoes not utilize this opportunity properly is a miser. On the otherhand, there is the brahmana, or he who is intelligent enough to utilizethis body to solve all the problems of life.The krpanas, or miserly persons, waste their time in being overlyaffectionate for family, society, country, etc., in the materialconception of life. One is often attached to family life, namely towife, children and other members, on the basis of "skin disease." Thekrpana thinks that he is able to protect his family members from death;or the krpana thinks that his family or society can save him from theverge of death. Such family attachment can be found even in the loweranimals who take care of children also. Being intelligent, Arjuna couldunderstand that his affection for family members and his wish toprotect them from death were the causes of his perplexities. Althoughhe could understand that his duty to fight was awaiting him, still, onaccount of miserly weakness, he could not discharge the duties. He istherefore asking Lord Krsna, the supreme spiritual master, to make adefinite solution. He offers himself to Krsna as a disciple. He wantsto stop friendly talks. Talks between the master and the disciple areserious, and now Arjuna wants to talk very seriously before therecognized spiritual master. Krsna is therefore the original spiritualmaster of the science of Bhagavad-gita, and Arjuna is the firstdisciple for understanding the Gita. How Arjuna understands the
Bhagavad-gita is stated in the Gita itself. And yet foolish mundane
scholars explain that one need not submit to Krsna as a person, but to"the unborn within Krsna." There is no difference between Krsna'swithin and without. And one who has no sense of this understanding isthe greatest fool in trying to understand Bhagavad-gita.
TEXT 8
na hi prapasyami mamapanudyad
yac chokam ucchosanam indriyanamavapya bhumav asapatnam rddhamrajyam suranam api cadhipatyam
SYNONYMSna--do not; hi--certainly; prapasyami--I see; mama--my; apanudyat--can
drive away; yat--that; sokam--lamentation; ucchosanam--drying up;indriyanam--of the senses; avapya--achieving; bhumau--on the earth;asapatnam--without rival; rddham--prosperous; rajyam--kingdom; suranam--of the demigods; api--even; ca--also; adhipatyam--supremacy.
TRANSLATIONI can find no means to drive away this grief which is drying up my
senses. I will not be able to destroy it even if I win an unrivaledkingdom on earth with sovereignty like the demigods in heaven.
PURPORTAlthough Arjuna was putting forward so many arguments based on
knowledge of the principles of religion and moral codes, it appearsthat he was unable to solve his real problem without the help of thespiritual master, Lord Sri Krsna. He could understand that his so-called knowledge was useless in driving away his problems, which weredrying up his whole existence; and it was impossible for him to solvesuch perplexities without the help of a spiritual master like LordKrsna. Academic knowledge, scholarship, high position, etc., are alluseless in solving the problems of life; help can only be given by aspiritual master like Krsna. Therefore, the conclusion is that aspiritual master who is one hundred percent Krsna conscious is the bonafide spiritual master, for he can solve the problems of life. LordCaitanya said that one who is master in the science of Krsnaconsciousness, regardless of his social position, is the real spiritualmaster.
kiba vipra, kiba nyasi, sudra kene naya
yei krsna-tattva-vetta, sei 'guru' haya
"It does not matter whether a person is a vipra [learned scholar in
Vedic wisdom] or is born in a lower family, or is in the renouncedorder of life--if he is master in the science of Krsna, he is theperfect and bona fide spiritual master." (Caitanya-caritamrta, Madhya8.128) So without being a master in the science of Krsna consciousness,no one is a bona fide spiritual master. It is also said in the Vedicliteratures:
sat-karma-nipuno vipro
mantra-tantra-visaradah
avaisnavo gurur na syad
vaisnavah sva-paco guruh
"A scholarly brahmana, expert in all subjects of Vedic knowledge, is
unfit to become a spiritual master without being a Vaisnava, or expertin the science of Krsna consciousness. But a person born in a family ofa lower caste can become a spiritual master if he is a Vaisnava, orKrsna conscious." (Padma Purana)The problems of material existence--birth, old age, disease and death--cannot be counteracted by accumulation of wealth and economicdevelopment. In many parts of the world there are states which arereplete with all facilities of life, which are full of wealth andeconomically developed, yet the problems of material existence arestill present. They are seeking peace in different ways, but they canachieve real happiness only if they consult Krsna, or the Bhagavad-gitaand Srimad-Bhagavatam--which constitute the science of Krsna--or thebona fide representative of Krsna, the man in Krsna consciousness.If economic development and material comforts could drive away one'slamentations for family, social, national or international inebrieties,then Arjuna would not have said that even an unrivaled kingdom on earthor supremacy like that of the demigods in the heavenly planets wouldnot be able to drive away his lamentations. He sought, therefore,refuge in Krsna consciousness, and that is the right path for peace andharmony. Economic development or supremacy over the world can befinished at any moment by the cataclysms of material nature. Evenelevation into a higher planetary situation, as men are now seeking aplace on the moon planet, can also be finished at one stroke. TheBhagavad-gita confirms this: ksine punye martya-lokam visanti. "Whenthe results of pious activities are finished, one falls down again fromthe peak of happiness to the lowest status of life." Many politiciansof the world have fallen down in that way. Such downfalls onlyconstitute more causes for lamentation.Therefore, if we want to curb lamentation for good, then we have totake shelter of Krsna, as Arjuna is seeking to do. So Arjuna askedKrsna to solve his problem definitely, and that is the way of Krsnaconsciousness.
TEXT 9
sanjaya uvaca
evam uktva hrsikesamgudakesah parantapahna yotsya iti govindamuktva tusnim babhuva ha
SYNONYMSsanjayah uvaca--Sanjaya said; evam--thus; uktva--speaking; hrsikesam--
unto Krsna, the master of the senses; gudakesah--Arjuna, the master atcurbing ignorance; parantapah--the chastiser of the enemies; na yotsye--I shall not fight; iti--thus; govindam--unto Krsna, the giver ofpleasure; uktva--saying; tusnim--silent; babhuva--became; ha--certainly.
TRANSLATIONSanjaya said: Having spoken thus, Arjuna, chastiser of enemies, told
Krsna, "Govinda, I shall not fight," and fell silent.
PURPORT
Dhrtarastra must have been very glad to understand that Arjuna was not
going to fight and was instead leaving the battlefield for the beggingprofession. But Sanjaya disappointed him again in relating that Arjunawas competent to kill his enemies (parantapah). Although Arjuna was,for the time being, overwhelmed with false grief due to familyaffection, he surrendered unto Krsna, the supreme spiritual master, asa disciple. This indicated that he would soon be free from the falselamentation resulting from family affection and would be enlightenedwith perfect knowledge of self-realization, or Krsna consciousness, andwould then surely fight. Thus Dhrtarastra's joy would be frustrated,since Arjuna would be enlightened by Krsna and would fight to the end.
TEXT 10
tam uvaca hrsikesah
prahasann iva bharatasenayor ubhayor madhyevisidantam, idam vacah
SYNONYMStam--unto him; uvaca--said; hrsikesah--the master of the senses, Krsna;
prahasan--smiling; iva--like that; bharata--O Dhrtarastra, descendantof Bharata; senayoh--of the armies; ubhayoh--of both parties; madhye--between; visidantam--unto the lamenting one; idam--the following;vacah--words.
TRANSLATIONO descendant of Bharata, at that time Krsna, smiling, in the midst of
both the armies, spoke the following words to the grief-strickenArjuna.
PURPORTThe talk was going on between intimate friends, namely the Hrsikesa and
the Gudakesa. As friends, both of them were on the same level, but oneof them voluntarily became a student of the other. Krsna was smilingbecause a friend had chosen to become a disciple. As Lord of all, He isalways in the superior position as the master of everyone, and yet theLord accepts one who wishes to be a friend, a son, a lover or adevotee, or who wants Him in such a role. But when He was accepted asthe master, He at once assumed the role and talked with the disciplelike the master--with gravity, as it is required. It appears that thetalk between the master and the disciple was openly exchanged in thepresence of both armies so that all were benefited. So the talks ofBhagavad-gita are not for any particular person, society, or community,but they are for all, and friends or enemies are equally entitled tohear them.
TEXT 11
sri-bhagavan uvaca
asocyan anvasocas tvamprajna-vadams ca bhasase
gatasun agatasums ca
nanusocanti panditah
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; asocyan--
that which is not worthy of lamentation; anvasocah--you are lamenting;tvam--you; prajna-vadan--learned talks; ca--also; bhasase--speaking;gata--lost; asun--life; agata--not past; asun--life; ca--also; na--never; anusocanti--lament; panditah--the learned.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: While speaking learned words, you are mourning
for what is not worthy of grief. Those who are wise lament neither forthe living nor the dead.
PURPORTThe Lord at once took the position of the teacher and chastised the
student, calling him, indirectly, a fool. The Lord said, "You aretalking like a learned man, but you do not know that one who islearned--one who knows what is body and what is soul--does not lamentfor any stage of the body, neither in the living nor in the deadcondition." As it will be explained in later chapters, it will be clearthat knowledge means to know matter and spirit and the controller ofboth. Arjuna argued that religious principles should be given moreimportance than politics or sociology, but he did not know thatknowledge of matter, soul and the Supreme is even more important thanreligious formularies. And, because he was lacking in that knowledge,he should not have posed himself as a very learned man. As he did nothappen to be a very learned man, he was consequently lamenting forsomething which was unworthy of lamentation. The body is born and isdestined to be vanquished today or tomorrow; therefore the body is notas important as the soul. One who knows this is actually learned, andfor him there is no cause for lamentation, regardless of the conditionof the material body.
TEXT 12
na tv evaham jatu nasam
na tvam neme janadhipahna caiva na bhavisyamahsarve vayam atah param
SYNONYMSna--never; tu--but; eva--certainly; aham--I; jatu--become; na--never;
asam--existed; na--it is not so; tvam--yourself; na--not; ime--allthese; jana-adhipah--kings; na--never; ca--also; eva--certainly; na--not like that; bhavisyamah--shall exist; sarve--all of us; vayam--we;atah param--hereafter.
TRANSLATIONNever was there a time when I did not exist, nor you, nor all these
kings; nor in the future shall any of us cease to be.
PURPORT
In the Vedas, in the Katha Upanisad as well as in the Svetasvatara
Upanisad, it is said that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is themaintainer of innumerable living entities, in terms of their differentsituations according to individual work and reaction of work. ThatSupreme Personality of Godhead is also, by His plenary portions, alivein the heart of every living entity. Only saintly persons who can see,within and without, the same Supreme Lord, can actually attain toperfect and eternal peace.
nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam
eko bahunam yo vidadhati kamantam atma-stham ye 'nupasyanti dhirastesam santih sasvati netaresam
The same Vedic truth given to Arjuna is given to all persons in the
world who pose themselves as very learned but factually have but a poorfund of knowledge. The Lord says clearly that He Himself, Arjuna, andall the kings who are assembled on the battlefield, are eternallyindividual beings and that the Lord is eternally the maintainer of theindividual living entities both in their conditioned as well as intheir liberated situations. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is thesupreme individual person, and Arjuna, the Lord's eternal associate,and all the kings assembled there are individual, eternal persons. Itis not that they did not exist as individuals in the past, and it isnot that they will not remain eternal persons. Their individualityexisted in the past, and their individuality will continue in thefuture without interruption. Therefore, there is no cause forlamentation for anyone.The Mayavadi theory that after liberation the individual soul,separated by the covering of maya or illusion, will merge into theimpersonal Brahman and lose its individual existence is not supportedherein by Lord Krsna, the supreme authority. Nor is the theory that weonly think of individuality in the conditioned state supported herein.Krsna clearly says herein that in the future also the individuality ofthe Lord and others, as it is confirmed in the Upanisads, will continueeternally. This statement of Krsna is authoritative because Krsnacannot be subject to illusion. If individuality is not a fact, thenKrsna would not have stressed it so much--even for the future. TheMayavadi may argue that the individuality spoken of by Krsna is notspiritual, but material. Even accepting the argument that theindividuality is material, then how can one distinguish Krsna'sindividuality? Krsna affirms His individuality in the past and confirmsHis individuality in the future also. He has confirmed Hisindividuality in many ways, and impersonal Brahman has been declared tobe subordinate to Him. Krsna has maintained spiritual individuality allalong; if He is accepted as an ordinary conditioned soul in individualconsciousness, then His Bhagavad-gita has no value as authoritativescripture. A common man with all the four defects of human frailty isunable to teach that which is worth hearing. The Gita is above suchliterature. No mundane book compares with the Bhagavad-gita. When oneaccepts Krsna as an ordinary man, the Gita loses all importance. TheMayavadi argues that the plurality mentioned in this verse isconventional and that it refers to the body. But previous to this versesuch a bodily conception is already condemned. After condemning thebodily conception of the living entities, how was it possible for Krsnato place a conventional proposition on the body again? Therefore,
individuality is maintained on spiritual grounds and is thus confirmed
by great acaryas like Sri Ramanuja and others. It is clearly mentionedin many places in the Gita that this spiritual individuality isunderstood by those who are devotees of the Lord. Those who are enviousof Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead have no bona fide accessto this great literature. The nondevotee's approach to the teachings ofthe Gita is something like bees licking on a bottle of honey. Onecannot have a taste of honey unless one opens the bottle. Similarly,the mysticism of the Bhagavad-gita can be understood only by devotees,and no one else can taste it, as it is stated in the Fourth Chapter ofthe book. Nor can the Gita be touched by persons who envy the veryexistence of the Lord. Therefore, the Mayavadi explanation of the Gitais a most misleading presentation of the whole truth. Lord Caitanya hasforbidden us to read commentations made by the Mayavadis and warns thatone who takes to such an understanding of the Mayavadi philosophy losesall power to understand the real mystery of the Gita. If individualityrefers to the empirical universe, then there is no need of teaching bythe Lord. The plurality of the individual soul and of the Lord is aneternal fact, and it is confirmed by the Vedas as above mentioned.
TEXT 13
dehino 'smin yatha dehe
kaumaram yauvanam jaratatha dehantara-praptirdhiras tatra na muhyati
SYNONYMSdehinah--of the embodied; asmin--in this; yatha--as; dehe--in the body;
kaumaram--boyhood; yauvanam--youth; jara--old age; tatha--similarly;deha-antara--transference of the body; praptih--achievement; dhirah--the sober; tatra--thereupon; na--never; muhyati--deluded.
TRANSLATIONAs the embodied soul continuously passes, in this body, from boyhood to
youth to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death.A self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change.
PURPORTSince every living entity is an individual soul, each is changing his
body every moment, manifesting sometimes as a child, sometimes as ayouth, and sometimes as an old man. Yet the same spirit soul is thereand does not undergo any change. This individual soul finally changesthe body at death and transmigrates to another body; and since it issure to have another body in the next birth--either material orspiritual--there was no cause for lamentation by Arjuna on account ofdeath, neither for Bhisma nor for Drona, for whom he was so muchconcerned. Rather, he should rejoice for their changing bodies from oldto new ones, thereby rejuvenating their energy. Such changes of bodyaccount for varieties of enjoyment or suffering, according to one'swork in life. So Bhisma and Drona, being noble souls, were surely goingto have either spiritual bodies in the next life, or at least life inheavenly bodies for superior enjoyment of material existence. So, ineither case, there was no cause of lamentation.
Any man who has perfect knowledge of the constitution of the individual
soul, the Supersoul and nature--both material and spiritual--is calleda dhira or a most sober man. Such a man is never deluded by the changeof bodies. The Mayavadi theory of oneness of the spirit soul cannot beentertained on the ground that the spirit soul cannot be cut intopieces as a fragmental portion. Such cutting into different individualsouls would make the Supreme cleavable or changeable, against theprinciple of the Supreme Soul being unchangeable. As confirmed in theGita, the fragmental portions of the Supreme exist eternally (sanatana)and are called ksara; that is, they have a tendency to fall down intomaterial nature. These fragmental portions are eternally so, and evenafter liberation, the individual soul remains the same--fragmental. Butonce liberated, he lives an eternal life in bliss and knowledge withthe Personality of Godhead. The theory of reflection can be applied tothe Supersoul, who is present in each and every individual body and isknown as the Paramatma, who is different from the individual livingentity. When the sky is reflected in water, the reflections representboth the sun and the moon and the stars also. The stars can be comparedto the living entities and the sun or the moon to the Supreme Lord. Theindividual fragmental spirit soul is represented by Arjuna, and theSupreme Soul is the Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna. They are not onthe same level, as it will be apparent in the beginning of the FourthChapter. If Arjuna is on the same level with Krsna, and Krsna is notsuperior to Arjuna, then their relationship of instructor andinstructed becomes meaningless. If both of them are deluded by theillusory energy (maya), then there is no need of one being theinstructor and the other the instructed. Such instruction would beuseless because, in the clutches of maya, no one can be anauthoritative instructor. Under the circumstances, it is admitted thatLord Krsna is the Supreme Lord, superior in position to the livingentity, Arjuna, who is a forgetful soul deluded by maya.
TEXT 14
matra-sparsas tu kaunteya
sitosna-sukha-duhkha-dahagamapayino 'nityastams titiksasva bharata
SYNONYMSmatra--sensuous; sparsah--perception; tu--only; kaunteya--O son of
Kunti; sita--winter; usna--summer; sukha--happiness; duhkha-dah--givingpain; agama--appearing; apayinah--disappearing; anityah--nonpermanent;tan--all of them; titiksasva--just try to tolerate; bharata--Odescendant of the Bharata dynasty.
TRANSLATIONO son of Kunti, the nonpermanent appearance of happiness and distress,
and their disappearance in due course, are like the appearance anddisappearance of winter and summer seasons. They arise from senseperception, O scion of Bharata, and one must learn to tolerate themwithout being disturbed.
PURPORT
In the proper discharge of duty, one has to learn to tolerate
nonpermanent appearances and disappearances of happiness and distress.According to Vedic injunction, one has to take his bath early in themorning even during the month of Magha (January-February). It is verycold at that time, but in spite of that a man who abides by thereligious principles does not hesitate to take his bath. Similarly, awoman does not hesitate to cook in the kitchen in the months of May andJune, the hottest part of the summer season. One has to execute hisduty in spite of climatic inconveniences. Similarly, to fight is thereligious principle of the ksatriyas, and although one has to fightwith some friend or relative, one should not deviate from hisprescribed duty. One has to follow the prescribed rules and regulationsof religious principles in order to rise up to the platform ofknowledge because by knowledge and devotion only can one liberatehimself from the clutches of maya (illusion).The two different names of address given to Arjuna are alsosignificant. To address him as Kaunteya signifies his great bloodrelations from his mother's side; and to address him as Bharatasignifies his greatness from his father's side. From both sides he issupposed to have a great heritage. A great heritage bringsresponsibility in the matter of proper discharge of duties; therefore,he cannot avoid fighting.
TEXT 15
yam hi na vyathayanty ete
purusam purusarsabhasama-duhkha-sukham dhiramso 'mrtatvaya kalpate
SYNONYMSyam--one whom; hi--certainly; na--never; vyathayanti--are distressing;
ete--all these; purusam--to a person; purusa-rsabha--O best among men;sama--unaltered; duhkha--distressed; sukham--happiness; dhiram--patient; sah--he; amrtatvaya--for liberation; kalpate--is consideredeligible.
TRANSLATIONO best among men [Arjuna], the person who is not disturbed by happiness
and distress and is steady in both is certainly eligible forliberation.
PURPORTAnyone who is steady in his determination for the advanced stage of
spiritual realization and can equally tolerate the onslaughts ofdistress and happiness is certainly a person eligible for liberation.In the varnasrama institution, the fourth stage of life, namely therenounced order (sannyasa), is a painstaking situation. But one who isserious about making his life perfect surely adopts the sannyasa orderof life in spite of all difficulties. The difficulties usually arisefrom having to sever family relationships, to give up the connection ofwife and children. But if anyone is able to tolerate such difficulties,surely his path to spiritual realization is complete. Similarly, inArjuna's discharge of duties as a ksatriya, he is advised to persevere,even if it is difficult to fight with his family members or similarly
beloved persons. Lord Caitanya took sannyasa at the age of twenty-four,
and His dependents, young wife as well as old mother, had no one elseto look after them. Yet for a higher cause He took sannyasa and wassteady in the discharge of higher duties. That is the way of achievingliberation from material bondage.
TEXT 16
nasato vidyate bhavo
nabhavo vidyate satahubhayor api drsto 'ntastv anayos tattva-darsibhih
SYNONYMSna--never; asatah--of the nonexistent; vidyate--there is; bhavah--
endurance; na--never; abhavah--changing quality; vidyate--there is;satah--of the eternal; ubhayoh--of the two; api--verily; drstah--observed; antah--conclusion; tu--but; anayoh--of them; tattva--truth;darsibhih--by the seers.
TRANSLATIONThose who are seers of the truth have concluded that of the nonexistent
there is no endurance, and of the existent there is no cessation. Thisseers have concluded by studying the nature of both.
PURPORTThere is no endurance of the changing body. That the body is changing
every moment by the actions and reactions of the different cells isadmitted by modern medical science; and thus growth and old age aretaking place in the body. But the spirit soul exists permanently,remaining the same despite all changes of the body and the mind. Thatis the difference between matter and spirit. By nature, the body isever changing, and the soul is eternal. This conclusion is establishedby all classes of seers of the truth, both impersonalist andpersonalist. In the Visnu Purana (2.12.38) it is stated that Visnu andHis abodes all have self-illuminated spiritual existence (jyotimsivisnur bhuvanani visnuh). The words existent and nonexistent refer onlyto spirit and matter. That is the version of all seers of truth.This is the beginning of the instruction by the Lord to the livingentities who are bewildered by the influence of ignorance. Removal ofignorance involves the reestablishment of the eternal relationshipbetween the worshiper and the worshipable and the consequentunderstanding of the difference between the part and parcel livingentities and the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One can understand thenature of the Supreme by thorough study of oneself, the differencebetween oneself and the Supreme being understood as the relationshipbetween the part and the whole. In the Vedanta-sutras, as well as inthe Srimad-Bhagavatam, the Supreme has been accepted as the origin ofall emanations. Such emanations are experienced by superior andinferior natural sequences. The living entities belong to the superiornature, as it will be revealed in the Seventh Chapter. Although thereis no difference between the energy and the energetic, the energetic isaccepted as the Supreme, and energy or nature is accepted as thesubordinate. The living entities, therefore, are always subordinate tothe Supreme Lord, as in the case of the master and the servant, or the
teacher and the taught. Such clear knowledge is impossible to
understand under the spell of ignorance, and to drive away suchignorance the Lord teaches the Bhagavad-gita for the enlightenment ofall living entities for all time.
TEXT 17
avinasi tu tad viddhi
yena sarvam idam tatamvinasam avyayasyasyana kascit kartum arhati
SYNONYMSavinasi--imperishable; tu--but; tat--that; viddhi--know it; yena--by
whom; sarvam--all of the body; idam--this; tatam--pervaded; vinasam--destruction; avyayasya--of the imperishable; asya--of it; na kascit--noone; kartum--to do; arhati--is able.
TRANSLATIONKnow that which pervades the entire body is indestructible. No one is
able to destroy the imperishable soul.
PURPORTThis verse more clearly explains the real nature of the soul, which is
spread all over the body. Anyone can understand what is spread all overthe body: it is consciousness. Everyone is conscious of the pains andpleasures of the body in part or as a whole. This spreading ofconsciousness is limited within one's own body. The pains and pleasuresof one body are unknown to another. Therefore, each and every body isthe embodiment of an individual soul, and the symptom of the soul'spresence is perceived as individual consciousness. This soul isdescribed as one ten-thousandth part of the upper portion of the hairpoint in size. The Svetasvatara Upanisad (5.9) confirms this:
balagra-sata-bhagasya
satadha kalpitasya cabhago jivah vijneyahsa canantyaya kalpate
"When the upper point of a hair is divided into one hundred parts and
again each of such parts is further divided into one hundred parts,each such part is the measurement of the dimension of the spirit soul."Similarly the same version is stated:
kesagra-sata-bhagasya
satamsah sadrsatmakahjivah suksma-svarupo 'yamsankhyatito hi cit-kanah
"There are innumerable particles of spiritual atoms, which are measured
as one ten-thousandth of the upper portion of the hair."Therefore, the individual particle of spirit soul is a spiritual atomsmaller than the material atoms, and such atoms are innumerable. Thisvery small spiritual spark is the basic principle of the material body,and the influence of such a spiritual spark is spread all over the body
as the influence of the active principle of some medicine spreads
throughout the body. This current of the spirit soul is felt all overthe body as consciousness, and that is the proof of the presence of thesoul. Any layman can understand that the material body minusconsciousness is a dead body, and this consciousness cannot be revivedin the body by any means of material administration. Therefore,consciousness is not due to any amount of material combination, but tothe spirit soul. In the Mundaka Upanisad (3.1.9) the measurement of theatomic spirit soul is further explained:
eso 'nur atma cetasa veditavyo
yasmin pranah pancadha samvivesapranais cittam sarvam otam prajanamyasmin visuddhe vibhavaty esa atma
"The soul is atomic in size and can be perceived by perfect
intelligence. This atomic soul is floating in the five kinds of air[prana, apana, vyana, samana and udana], is situated within the heart,and spreads its influence all over the body of the embodied livingentities. When the soul is purified from the contamination of the fivekinds of material air, its spiritual influence is exhibited."The hatha-yoga system is meant for controlling the five kinds of airencircling the pure soul by different kinds of sitting postures--notfor any material profit, but for liberation of the minute soul from theentanglement of the material atmosphere.So the constitution of the atomic soul is admitted in all Vedicliteratures, and it is also actually felt in the practical experienceof any sane man. Only the insane man can think of this atomic soul asall-pervading visnu-tattva.The influence of the atomic soul can be spread all over a particularbody. According to the Mundaka Upanisad, this atomic soul is situatedin the heart of every living entity, and because the measurement of theatomic soul is beyond the power of appreciation of the materialscientists, some of them assert foolishly that there is no soul. Theindividual atomic soul is definitely there in the heart along with theSupersoul, and thus all the energies of bodily movement are emanatingfrom this part of the body. The corpuscles which carry the oxygen fromthe lungs gather energy from the soul. When the soul passes away fromthis position, activity of the blood, generating fusion, ceases.Medical science accepts the importance of the red corpuscles, but itcannot ascertain that the source of the energy is the soul. Medicalscience, however, does admit that the heart is the seat of all energiesof the body.Such atomic particles of the spirit whole are compared to the sunshinemolecules. In the sunshine there are innumerable radiant molecules.Similarly, the fragmental parts of the Supreme Lord are atomic sparksof the rays of the Supreme Lord, called by the name prabha, or superiorenergy. Neither Vedic knowledge nor modern science denies the existenceof the spirit soul in the body, and the science of the soul isexplicitly described in the Bhagavad-gita by the Personality of GodheadHimself.
TEXT 18
antavanta ime deha
nityasyoktah saririnahanasino 'prameyasyatasmad yudhyasva bharata
SYNONYMS
anta-vantah--perishable; ime--all these; dehah--material bodies;
nityasya--eternal in existence; uktah--it is so said; saririnah--theembodied soul; anasinah--never to be destroyed; aprameyasya--immeasurable; tasmat--therefore; yudhyasva--fight; bharata--Odescendant of Bharata.
TRANSLATIONOnly the material body of the indestructible, immeasurable and eternal
living entity is subject to destruction; therefore, fight, O descendantof Bharata.
PURPORTThe material body is perishable by nature. It may perish immediately,
or it may do so after a hundred years. It is a question of time only.There is no chance of maintaining it indefinitely. But the spirit soulis so minute that it cannot even be seen by an enemy, to say nothing ofbeing killed. As mentioned in the previous verse, it is so small thatno one can have any idea how to measure its dimension. So from bothviewpoints there is no cause of lamentation because the living entitycan neither be killed as he is, nor can the material body, which cannotbe saved for any length of time, be permanently protected. The minuteparticle of the whole spirit acquires this material body according tohis work, and therefore observance of religious principles should beutilized. In the Vedanta-sutras the living entity is qualified as lightbecause he is part and parcel of the supreme light. As sunlightmaintains the entire universe, so the light of the soul maintains thismaterial body. As soon as the spirit soul is out of this material body,the body begins to decompose; therefore it is the spirit soul whichmaintains this body. The body itself is unimportant. Arjuna was advisedto fight and sacrifice the material body for the cause of religion.
TEXT 19
ya enam vetti hantaram
yas cainam manyate hatamubhau tau na vijanitonayam hanti na hanyate
SYNONYMSyah--anyone; enam--this; vetti--knows; hantaram--the killer; yah--
anyone; ca--also; enam--this; manyate--thinks; hatam--killed; ubhau--both of them; tau--they; na--never; vijanitah--in knowledge; na--never;ayam--this; hanti--kills; na--nor; hanyate--be killed.
TRANSLATIONHe who thinks that the living entity is the slayer or that he is slain,
does not understand. One who is in knowledge knows that the self slaysnot nor is slain.
PURPORT
When an embodied living entity is hurt by fatal weapons, it is to be
known that the living entity within the body is not killed. The spiritsoul is so small that it is impossible to kill him by any materialweapon, as is evident from the previous verses. Nor is the livingentity killable, because of his spiritual constitution. What is killed,or is supposed to be killed, is the body only. This, however, does notat all encourage killing of the body. The Vedic injunction is mahimsyat sarva bhutani: never commit violence to anyone. Nor doesunderstanding that the living entity is not killed encourage animalslaughter. Killing the body of anyone without authority is abominableand is punishable by the law of the state as well as by the law of theLord. Arjuna, however, is being engaged in killing for the principle ofreligion, and not whimsically.
TEXT 20
na jayate mriyate va kadacin
nayam bhutva bhavita va na bhuyahajo nityah sasvato 'yam puranona hanyate hanyamane sarire
SYNONYMSna--never; jayate--takes birth; mriyate--never dies; va--either;
kadacit--at any time (past, present or future); na--never; ayam--this;bhutva--came into being; bhavita--will come to be; va--or; na--not;bhuyah--or has coming to be; ajah--unborn; nityah--eternal; sasvatah--permanent; ayam--this; puranah--the oldest; na--never; hanyate--iskilled; hanyamane--being killed; sarire--by the body.
TRANSLATIONFor the soul there is never birth nor death. Nor, having once been,
does He ever cease to be. He is unborn, eternal, ever-existing, undyingand primeval. He is not slain when the body is slain.
PURPORTQualitatively, the small atomic fragmental part of the Supreme Spirit
is one with the Supreme. He undergoes no changes like the body.Sometimes the soul is called the steady, or kutastha. The body issubject to six kinds of transformations. It takes its birth from thewomb of the mother's body, remains for some time, grows, produces someeffects, gradually dwindles, and at last vanishes into oblivion. Thesoul, however, does not go through such changes. The soul is not born,but, because he takes on a material body, the body takes its birth. Thesoul does not take birth there, and the soul does not die. Anythingwhich has birth also has death. And because the soul has no birth, hetherefore has no past, present or future. He is eternal, ever-existing,and primeval--that is, there is no trace in history of his coming intobeing. Under the impression of the body, we seek the history of birth,etc., of the soul. The soul does not at any time become old, as thebody does. The so-called old man, therefore, feels himself to be in thesame spirit as in his childhood or youth. The changes of the body donot affect the soul. The soul does not deteriorate like a tree, noranything material. The soul has no by-product either. The by-productsof the body, namely children, are also different individual souls; and,owing to the body, they appear as children of a particular man. The
body develops because of the soul's presence, but the soul has neither
offshoots nor change. Therefore, the soul is free from the six changesof the body.In the Katha Upanisad (1.2.18) also we find a similar passage whichreads:
na jayate mriyate va vipascin
nayam kutascin na babhuva kascitajo nityah sasvato 'yam puranona hanyate hanyamane sarire
The meaning and purport of this verse is the same as in the Bhagavad-
gita, but here in this verse there is one special word, vipascit, whichmeans learned or with knowledge.The soul is full of knowledge, or full always with consciousness.Therefore, consciousness is the symptom of the soul. Even if one doesnot find the soul within the heart, where he is situated, one can stillunderstand the presence of the soul simply by the presence ofconsciousness. Sometimes we do not find the sun in the sky owing toclouds, or for some other reason, but the light of the sun is alwaysthere, and we are convinced that it is therefore daytime. As soon asthere is a little light in the sky early in the morning, we canunderstand that the sun is in the sky. Similarly, since there is someconsciousness in all bodies--whether man or animal--we can understandthe presence of the soul. This consciousness of the soul is, however,different from the consciousness of the Supreme because the supremeconsciousness is all-knowledge--past, present and future. Theconsciousness of the individual soul is prone to be forgetful. When heis forgetful of his real nature, he obtains education and enlightenmentfrom the superior lessons of Krsna. But Krsna is not like the forgetfulsoul. If so, Krsna's teachings of Bhagavad-gita would be useless.There are two kinds of souls--namely the minute particle soul (anu-atma) and the Supersoul (vibhu-atma). This is also confirmed in theKatha Upanisad (1.2.20) in this way:
anor aniyan mahato mahiyan
atmasya jantor nihito guhayamtam akratuh pasyati vita-sokodhatuh prasadan mahimanam atmanah
"Both the Supersoul [Paramatma] and the atomic soul [jivatma] are
situated on the same tree of the body within the same heart of theliving being, and only one who has become free from all materialdesires as well as lamentations can, by the grace of the Supreme,understand the glories of the soul." Krsna is the fountainhead of theSupersoul also, as it will be disclosed in the following chapters, andArjuna is the atomic soul, forgetful of his real nature; therefore herequires to be enlightened by Krsna, or by His bona fide representative(the spiritual master).
TEXT 21
vedavinasinam nityam
ya enam ajam avyayamkatham sa purusah parthakam ghatayati hanti kam
SYNONYMS
veda--in knowledge; avinasinam--indestructible; nityam--always; yah--
one who; enam--this (soul); ajam--unborn; avyayam--immutable; katham--how; sah--he; purusah--person; partha--O Partha (Arjuna); kam--whom;ghatayati--hurts; hanti--kills; kam--whom.
TRANSLATIONO Partha, how can a person who knows that the soul is indestructible,
unborn, eternal and immutable, kill anyone or cause anyone to kill?
PURPORTEverything has its proper utility, and a man who is situated in
complete knowledge knows how and where to apply a thing for its properutility. Similarly, violence also has its utility, and how to applyviolence rests with the person in knowledge. Although the justice ofthe peace awards capital punishment to a person condemned for murder,the justice of the peace cannot be blamed because he orders violence toanother person according to the codes of justice. In Manu-samhita, thelawbook for mankind, it is supported that a murderer should becondemned to death so that in his next life he will not have to sufferfor the great sin he has committed. Therefore, the king's punishment ofhanging a murderer is actually beneficial. Similarly, when Krsna ordersfighting, it must be concluded that violence is for supreme justice,and, as such, Arjuna should follow the instruction, knowing well thatsuch violence, committed in the act of fighting for Krsna, is notviolence at all because, at any rate, the man, or rather the soul,cannot be killed; so for the administration of justice, so-calledviolence is permitted. A surgical operation is not meant to kill thepatient, but to cure him. Therefore the fighting to be executed byArjuna at the instruction of Krsna is with full knowledge, so there isno possibility of sinful reaction.
TEXT 22
vasamsi jirnani yatha vihaya
navani grhnati naro 'paranitatha sarirani vihaya jirnanyanyani samyati navani dehi
SYNONYMSvasamsi--garments; jirnani--old and worn out; yatha--as it is; vihaya--
giving up; navani--new garments; grhnati--does accept; narah--a man;aparani--other; tatha--in the same way; sarirani--bodies; vihaya--giving up; jirnani--old and useless; anyani--different; samyati--verilyaccepts; navani--new sets; dehi--the embodied.
TRANSLATIONAs a person puts on new garments, giving up old ones, similarly, the
soul accepts new material bodies, giving up the old and useless ones.
PURPORTChange of body by the atomic individual soul is an accepted fact. Even
some of the modern scientists who do not believe in the existence of
the soul, but at the same time cannot explain the source of energy from
the heart, have to accept continuous changes of body which appear fromchildhood to boyhood and from boyhood to youth and again from youth toold age. From old age, the change is transferred to another body. Thishas already been explained in a previous verse.Transference of the atomic individual soul to another body is madepossible by the grace of the Supersoul. The Supersoul fulfills thedesire of the atomic soul as one friend fulfills the desire of another.The Vedas, like the Mundaka Upanisad, as well as the SvetasvataraUpanisad, compare the soul and the Supersoul to two friendly birdssitting on the same tree. One of the birds (the individual atomic soul)is eating the fruit of the tree, and the other bird (Krsna) is simplywatching His friend. Of these two birds--although they are the same inquality--one is captivated by the fruits of the material tree, whilethe other is simply witnessing the activities of His friend. Krsna isthe witnessing bird, and Arjuna is the eating bird. Although they arefriends, one is still the master and the other is the servant.Forgetfulness of this relationship by the atomic soul is the cause ofone's changing his position from one tree to another or from one bodyto another. The jiva soul is struggling very hard on the tree of thematerial body, but as soon as he agrees to accept the other bird as thesupreme spiritual master--as Arjuna agreed to do by voluntary surrenderunto Krsna for instruction--the subordinate bird immediately becomesfree from all lamentations. Both the Mundaka Upanisad (3.1.2) andSvetasvatara Upanisad (4.7) confirm this:
samane vrkse puruso nimagno
'nisaya socati muhyamanahjustam yada pasyaty anyam isamasya mahimanam iti vita-sokah
"Although the two birds are in the same tree, the eating bird is fully
engrossed with anxiety and moroseness as the enjoyer of the fruits ofthe tree. But if in some way or other he turns his face to his friendwho is the Lord and knows His glories--at once the suffering birdbecomes free from all anxieties." Arjuna has now turned his facetowards his eternal friend, Krsna, and is understanding the Bhagavad-gita from Him. And thus, hearing from Krsna, he can understand thesupreme glories of the Lord and be free from lamentation.Arjuna is advised herewith by the Lord not to lament for the bodilychange of his old grandfather and his teacher. He should rather behappy to kill their bodies in the righteous fight so that they may becleansed at once of all reactions from various bodily activities. Onewho lays down his life on the sacrificial altar, or in the properbattlefield, is at once cleansed of bodily reactions and promoted to ahigher status of life. So there was no cause for Arjuna's lamentation.
TEXT 23
nainam chindanti sastrani
nainam dahati pavakahna cainam kledayanty apona sosayati marutah
SYNONYMSna--never; enam--this soul; chindanti--can cut to pieces; sastrani--all
weapons; na--never; enam--unto this soul; dahati--burns; pavakah--fire;
na--never; ca--also; enam--unto this soul; kledayanti--moistens; apah--
water; na--never; sosayati--dries; marutah--wind.
TRANSLATIONThe soul can never be cut to pieces by any weapon, nor burned by fire,
nor moistened by water, nor withered by the wind.
PURPORTAll kinds of weapons, swords, flames, rains, tornadoes, etc.--are
unable to kill the spirit soul. It appears that there were many kindsof weapons made of earth, water, air, ether, etc., in addition to themodern weapons of fire. Even the nuclear weapons of the modern age areclassified as fire weapons, but formerly there were other weapons madeof all different kinds of material elements. Firearms were counteractedby water weapons, which are now unknown to modern science. Nor domodern scientists have knowledge of tornado weapons. Nonetheless, thesoul can never be cut into pieces, nor annihilated by any number ofweapons, regardless of scientific devices.Nor was it ever possible to cut the individual souls from the originalSoul. The Mayavadi, however, cannot describe how the individual soulevolved from ignorance and consequently became covered by illusoryenergy. Because they are atomic individual souls (sanatana) eternally,they are prone to be covered by the illusory energy, and thus theybecome separated from the association of the Supreme Lord, just as thesparks of the fire, although one in quality with the fire, are prone tobe extinguished when out of the fire. In the Varaha Purana, the livingentities are described as separated parts and parcels of the Supreme.They are eternally so, according to the Bhagavad-gita also. So, evenafter being liberated from illusion, the living entity remains aseparate identity, as is evident from the teachings of the Lord toArjuna. Arjuna became liberated by the knowledge received from Krsna,but he never became one with Krsna.
TEXT 24
acchedyo 'yam adahyo 'yam
akledyo 'sosya eva canityah sarva-gatah sthanuracalo 'yam sanatanah
SYNONYMSacchedyah--unbreakable; ayam--this soul; adahyah--cannot be burned;
ayam--this soul; akledyah--insoluble; asosyah--cannot be dried; eva--certainly; ca--and; nityah--everlasting; sarva-gatah--all-pervading;sthanuh--unchangeable; acalah--immovable; ayam--this soul; sanatanah--eternally the same.
TRANSLATIONThis individual soul is unbreakable and insoluble, and can be neither
burned nor dried. He is everlasting, all-pervading, unchangeable,immovable and eternally the same.
PURPORT
All these qualifications of the atomic soul definitely prove that the
individual soul is eternally the atomic particle of the spirit whole,and he remains the same atom eternally, without change. The theory ofmonism is very difficult to apply in this case, because the individualsoul is never expected to become one homogeneously. After liberationfrom material contamination, the atomic soul may prefer to remain as aspiritual spark in the effulgent rays of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, but the intelligent souls enter into the spiritual planets toassociate with the Personality of Godhead.The word sarva-gata ("all-pervading") is significant because there isno doubt that living entities are all over God's creation. They live onthe land, in the water, in the air, within the earth and even withinfire. The belief that they are sterilized in fire is not acceptable,because it is clearly stated here that the soul cannot be burned byfire. Therefore, there is no doubt that there are living entities alsoin the sun planet with suitable bodies to live there. If the sun globeis uninhabited, then the word sarva-gata--"living everywhere"--becomesmeaningless.
TEXT 25
avyakto 'yam acintyo 'yam
avikaryo 'yam ucyatetasmad evam viditvainamnanusocitum arhasi
SYNONYMSavyaktah--invisible; ayam--this soul; acintyah--inconceivable; ayam--
this soul; avikaryah--unchangeable; ayam--this soul; ucyate--is said;tasmat--therefore; evam--like this; viditva--knowing it well; enam--this soul; na--do not; anusocitum--may lament over; arhasi--youdeserve.
TRANSLATIONIt is said that the soul is invisible, inconceivable, immutable, and
unchangeable. Knowing this, you should not grieve for the body.
PURPORTAs described previously, the magnitude of the soul is so small for our
material calculation that he cannot be seen even by the most powerfulmicroscope; therefore, he is invisible. As far as the soul's existenceis concerned, no one can establish his existence experimentally beyondthe proof of sruti, or Vedic wisdom. We have to accept this truth,because there is no other source of understanding the existence of thesoul, although it is a fact by perception. There are many things wehave to accept solely on grounds of superior authority. No one can denythe existence of his father, based upon the authority of his mother.There is no source of understanding the identity of the father exceptby the authority of the mother. Similarly, there is no source ofunderstanding the soul except by studying the Vedas. In other words,the soul is inconceivable by human experimental knowledge. The soul isconsciousness and conscious--that also is the statement of the Vedas,and we have to accept that. Unlike the bodily changes, there is nochange in the soul. As eternally unchangeable, the soul remains atomicin comparison to the infinite Supreme Soul. The Supreme Soul is
infinite, and the atomic soul is infinitesimal. Therefore, the
infinitesimal soul, being unchangeable, can never become equal to theinfinite soul, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This concept isrepeated in the Vedas in different ways just to confirm the stabilityof the conception of the soul. Repetition of something is necessary inorder that we understand the matter thoroughly, without error.
TEXT 26
atha cainam nitya-jatam
nityam va manyase mrtamtathapi tvam maha-bahonainam socitum arhasi
SYNONYMSatha--if, however; ca--also; enam--this soul; nitya-jatam--always born;
nityam--forever; va--either; manyase--so think; mrtam--dead; tatha api--still; tvam--you; maha-baho--O mighty-armed one; na--never; enam--about the soul; socitum--to lament; arhasi--deserve.
TRANSLATIONIf, however, you think that the soul is perpetually born and always
dies still, you still have no reason to lament, O mighty-armed.
PURPORTThere is always a class of philosophers, almost akin to the Buddhists,
who do not believe in the separate existence of the soul beyond thebody. When Lord Krsna spoke the Bhagavad-gita, it appears that suchphilosophers existed, and they were known as the lokayatikas andvaibhasikas. These philosophers maintained that life symptoms, or soul,takes place at a certain mature condition of material combination. Themodern material scientist and materialist philosophers also thinksimilarly. According to them, the body is a combination of physicalelements, and at a certain stage the life symptoms develop byinteraction of the physical body and chemical elements. The science ofanthropology is based on this philosophy. Currently, many pseudoreligions--now becoming fashionable in America--are also adhering tothis philosophy, as well as to the nihilistic nondevotional Buddhistsects.Even if Arjuna did not believe in the existence of the soul--as in thevaibhasika philosophy--there would still have been no cause forlamentation. No one laments the loss of a certain bulk of chemicals andstops discharging his prescribed duty. On the other hand, in modernscience and scientific warfare, so many tons of chemicals are wastedfor achieving victory over the enemy. According to the vaibhasikaphilosophy, the so-called soul or atma vanishes along with thedeterioration of the body. So, in any case, whether Arjuna accepted theVedic conclusion that there is an atomic soul, or whether he did notbelieve in the existence of the soul, he had no reason to lament.According to this theory, since there are so many living entitiesgenerating out of matter every moment, and so many of them are beingvanquished at every moment, there is no need to grieve for such anincidence. However, since he was not risking rebirth of the soul,Arjuna had no reason to be afraid of being affected with sinfulreactions due to his killing his grandfather and teacher. But at the
same time, Krsna sarcastically addressed Arjuna as maha-bahu, mighty-
armed, because He, at least, did not accept the theory of thevaibhasikas, which leaves aside the Vedic wisdom. As a ksatriya, Arjunabelonged to the Vedic culture, and it behooved him to continue tofollow its principles.
TEXT 27
jatasya hi dhruvo mrtyur
dhruvam janma mrtasya catasmad apariharye 'rthena tvam socitum arhasi
SYNONYMSjatasya--one who has taken his birth; hi--certainly; dhruvah--a fact;
mrtyuh--death; dhruvam--it is also a fact; janma--birth; mrtasya--ofthe dead; ca--also; tasmat--therefore; apariharye--for that which isunavoidable; arthe--in the matter of; na--do not; tvam--you; socitum--to lament; arhasi--deserve.
TRANSLATIONFor one who has taken his birth, death if certain; and for one who is
dead, birth is certain. Therefore, in the unavoidable discharge of yourduty, you should not lament.
PURPORTOne has to take birth according to one's activities of life. And, after
finishing one term of activities, one has to die to take birth for thenext. In this way the cycle of birth and death is revolving, one afterthe other without liberation. This cycle of birth and death does not,however, support unnecessary murder, slaughter and war. But at the sametime, violence and war are inevitable factors in human society forkeeping law and order.The Battle of Kuruksetra, being the will of the Supreme, was aninevitable event, and to fight for the right cause is the duty of aksatriya. Why should he be afraid of or aggrieved at the death of hisrelatives since he was discharging his proper duty? He did not deserveto break the law, thereby becoming subjected to the reactions of sinfulacts, of which he was so afraid. By avoiding the discharge of hisproper duty, he would not be able to stop the death of his relatives,and he would be degraded due to his selection of the wrong path ofaction.
TEXT 28
avyaktadini bhutani
vyakta-madhyani bharataavyakta-nidhanany evatatra ka paridevana
SYNONYMSavyakta-adini--in the beginning unmanifested; bhutani--all that are
created; vyakta--manifested; madhyani--in the middle; bharata--Odescendant of Bharata; avyakta--nonmanifested; nidhanani--all that are
vanquished; eva--it is all like that; tatra--therefore; ka--what;
paridevana--lamentation.
TRANSLATIONAll created beings are unmanifest in their beginning, manifest in their
interim state, and unmanifest again when they are annihilated. So whatneed is there for lamentation?
PURPORTAccepting that there are two classes of philosophers, one believing in
the existence of the soul and the other not believing in the existenceof the soul, there is no cause for lamentation in either case.Nonbelievers in the existence of the soul are called atheists byfollowers of Vedic wisdom. Yet even if, for argument's sake, we acceptthe atheistic theory, there is still no cause for lamentation. Apartfrom the separate existence of the soul, the material elements remainunmanifested before creation. From this subtle state of unmanifestationcomes manifestation, just as from ether, air is generated; from air,fire is generated; from fire, water is generated; and from water, earthbecomes manifested. From the earth, many varieties of manifestationstake place. Take, for example, a big skyscraper manifested from theearth. When it is dismantled, the manifestation becomes againunmanifested and remains as atoms in the ultimate stage. The law ofconservation of energy remains, but in course of time things aremanifested and unmanifested--that is the difference. Then what cause isthere for lamentation either in the stage of manifestation or inunmanifestation? Somehow or other, even in the unmanifested stage,things are not lost. Both at the beginning and at the end, all elementsremain unmanifested, and only in the middle are they manifested, andthis does not make any real material difference.And if we accept the Vedic conclusion as stated in the Bhagavad-gita(antavanta ime dehah) that these material bodies are perishable in duecourse of time (nityasyoktah saririnah) but that the soul is eternal,then we must remember always that the body is like a dress; thereforewhy lament the changing of a dress? The material body has no factualexistence in relation to the eternal soul. It is something like adream. In a dream we may think of flying in the sky, or sitting on achariot as a king, but when we wake up we can see that we are neitherin the sky nor seated on the chariot. The Vedic wisdom encourages self-realization on the basis of the nonexistence of the material body.Therefore, in either case, whether one believes in the existence of thesoul, or one does not believe in the existence of the soul, there is nocause for lamentation for loss of the body.
TEXT 29
ascarya-vat pasyati kascid enam
ascarya-vad vadati tathaiva canyahascarya-vac cainam anyah srnotisrutvapy enam veda na caiva kascit
SYNONYMSascarya-vat--amazing; pasyati--see; kascit--some; enam--this soul;
ascarya-vat--amazing; vadati--speak; tatha--there; eva--certainly; ca--also; anyah--another; ascarya-vat--similarly amazing; ca--also; enam--
this soul; anyah--others; srnoti--hear; srutva--having heard; api--
even; enam--this soul; veda--do know; na--never; ca--and; eva--certainly; kascit--anyone.
TRANSLATIONSome look at the soul as amazing, some describe him as amazing, and
some hear of him as amazing, while others, even after hearing abouthim, cannot understand him at all.
PURPORTSince Gitopanisad is largely based on the principles of the Upanisads,
it is not surprising to also find this passage in the Katha Upanisad(1.2.7):
sravanayapi bahubhir yo na labhyah
srnvanto 'pi bahavo yam na vidyuhascaryo vakta kusalo 'sya labdhaascaryo 'sya jnata kusalanusistah
The fact that the atomic soul is within the body of a gigantic animal,
in the body of a gigantic banyan tree, and also in the microbic germs,millions and billions of which occupy only an inch of space, iscertainly very amazing. Men with a poor fund of knowledge and men whoare not austere cannot understand the wonders of the individual atomicspark of spirit, even though it is explained by the greatest authorityof knowledge, who imparted lessons even to Brahma, the first livingbeing in the universe. Owing to a gross material conception of things,most men in this age cannot imagine how such a small particle canbecome both so great and so small. So men look at the soul proper aswonderful either by constitution or by description. Illusioned by thematerial energy, people are so engrossed in subject matter for sensegratification that they have very little time to understand thequestion of self-understanding, even though it is a fact that withoutthis self-understanding all activities result in ultimate defeat in thestruggle for existence. Perhaps one has no idea that one must think ofthe soul, and thus make a solution of the material miseries.Some people who are inclined to hear about the soul may be attendinglectures, in good association, but sometimes, owing to ignorance, theyare misguided by acceptance of the Supersoul and the atomic soul as onewithout distinction of magnitude. It is very difficult to find a manwho perfectly understands the position of the soul, the Supersoul, theatomic soul, their respective functions, relationships and all othermajor and minor details. And it is still more difficult to find a manwho has actually derived full benefit from knowledge of the soul, andwho is able to describe the position of the soul in different aspects.But if, somehow or other, one is able to understand the subject matterof the soul, then one's life is successful. The easiest process forunderstanding the subject matter of self, however, is to accept thestatements of the Bhagavad-gita spoken by the greatest authority, LordKrsna, without being deviated by other theories. But it also requires agreat deal of penance and sacrifice, either in this life or in theprevious ones, before one is able to accept Krsna as the SupremePersonality of Godhead. Krsna can, however, be known as such by thecauseless mercy of the pure devotee and by no other way.
TEXT 30
dehi nityam avadhyo 'yam
dehe sarvasya bharatatasmat sarvani bhutanina tvam socitum arhasi
SYNONYMSdehi--the owner of the material body; nityam--eternally; avadhyah--
cannot be killed; ayam--this soul; dehe--in the body; sarvasya--ofeveryone; bharata--O descendant of Bharata; tasmat--therefore; sarvani--all; bhutani--living entities (that are born); na--never; tvam--yourself; socitum--to lament; arhasi--deserve.
TRANSLATIONO descendant of Bharata, he who dwells in the body is eternal and can
never be slain. Therefore you need not grieve for any creature.
PURPORTThe Lord now concludes the chapter of instruction on the immutable
spirit soul. In describing the immortal soul in various ways, LordKrsna establishes that the soul is immortal and the body is temporary.Therefore Arjuna as a ksatriya should not abandon his duty out of fearthat his grandfather and teacher--Bhisma and Drona--will die in thebattle. On the authority of Sri Krsna, one has to believe that there isa soul different from the material body, not that there is no suchthing as soul, or that living symptoms develop at a certain stage ofmaterial maturity resulting from the interaction of chemicals. Thoughthe soul is immortal, violence is not encouraged, but at the time ofwar it is not discouraged when there is actual need for it. That needmust be justified in terms of the sanction of the Lord, and notcapriciously.
TEXT 31
sva-dharmam api caveksya
na vikampitum arhasidharmyad dhi yuddhac chreyo 'nyatksatriyasya na vidyate
SYNONYMSsva-dharmam--one's own religious principles; api--also; ca--indeed;
aveksya--considering; na--never; vikampitum--to hesitate; arhasi--youdeserve; dharmyat--from religious principles; hi--indeed; yuddhat--thanfighting; sreyah--better engagements; anyat--anything else;ksatriyasya--of the ksatriya; na--does not; vidyate--exist.
TRANSLATIONConsidering your specific duty as a ksatriya, you should know that
there is no better engagement for you than fighting on religiousprinciples; and so there is no need for hesitation.
PURPORT
Out of the four orders of social administration, the second order, for
the matter of good administration, is called ksatriya. Ksat means hurt.One who gives protection from harm is called ksatriya (trayate--to giveprotection). The ksatriyas are trained for killing in the forest. Aksatriya would go into the forest and challenge a tiger face to faceand fight with the tiger with his sword. When the tiger was killed, itwould be offered the royal order of cremation. This system is beingfollowed even up to the present day by the ksatriya kings of the Jaipurstate. The ksatriyas are specially trained for challenging and killingbecause religious violence is sometimes a necessary factor. Therefore,ksatriyas are never meant for accepting directly the order of sannyasaor renunciation. Nonviolence in politics may be a diplomacy, but it isnever a factor or principle. In the religious law books it is stated:
ahavesu mitho 'nyonyam
jighamsanto mahi-ksitahyuddhamanah param saktyasvargam yanty aparan-mukhah
yajnesu pasavo brahman
hanyante satatam dvijaihsamskrtah kila mantrais cate 'pi svargam avapnuvan
"In the battlefield, a king or ksatriya, while fighting another king
envious of him, is eligible for achieving heavenly planets after death,as the brahmanas also attain the heavenly planets by sacrificinganimals in the sacrificial fire." Therefore, killing on the battlefieldon religious principles and the killing of animals in the sacrificialfire are not at all considered to be acts of violence, because everyoneis benefited by the religious principles involved. The animalsacrificed gets a human life immediately without undergoing the gradualevolutionary process from one form to another, and the ksatriyas killedin the battlefield also attain the heavenly planets as do the brahmanaswho attain them by offering sacrifice.There are two kinds of sva-dharmas, specific duties. As long as one isnot liberated, one has to perform the duties of his particular body inaccordance with religious principles in order to achieve liberation.When one is liberated, one's sva-dharma--specific duty--becomesspiritual and is not in the material bodily concept. In the bodilyconception of life there are specific duties for the brahmanas andksatriyas respectively, and such duties are unavoidable. Sva-dharma isordained by the Lord, and this will be clarified in the Fourth Chapter.On the bodily plane sva-dharma is called varnasrama-dharma, or man'ssteppingstone for spiritual understanding. Human civilization beginsfrom the stage of varnasrama-dharma, or specific duties in terms of thespecific modes of nature of the body obtained. Discharging one'sspecific duty in any field of action in accordance with varnasrama-dharma serves to elevate one to a higher status of life.
TEXT 32
yadrcchaya copapannam
svarga-dvaram apavrtamsukhinah ksatriyah parthalabhante yuddham idrsam
SYNONYMS
yadrcchaya--by its own accord; ca--also; upapannam--arrived at; svarga-
-heavenly planet; dvaram--door; apavrtam--wide open; sukhinah--veryhappy; ksatriyah--the members of the royal order; partha--O son ofPrtha; labhante--do achieve; yuddham--war; idrsam--like this.
TRANSLATIONO Partha, happy are the ksatriyas to whom such fighting opportunities
come unsought, opening for them the doors of the heavenly planets.
PURPORTAs supreme teacher of the world, Lord Krsna condemns the attitude of
Arjuna who said, "I do not find any good in this fighting. It willcause perpetual habitation in hell." Such statements by Arjuna were dueto ignorance only. He wanted to become nonviolent in the discharge ofhis specific duty. For a ksatriya to be in the battlefield and tobecome nonviolent is the philosophy of fools. In the Parasara-smrti, orreligious codes made by Parasara, the great sage and father ofVyasadeva, it is stated:
ksatriyo hi praja raksan
sastra-panih pradandayannirjitya para-sainyadiksitim dharmena palayet
"The ksatriya's duty is to protect the citizens from all kinds of
difficulties, and for that reason he has to apply violence in suitablecases for law and order. Therefore he has to conquer the soldiers ofinimical kings, and thus, with religious principles, he should ruleover the world."Considering all aspects, Arjuna had no reason to refrain from fighting.If he should conquer his enemies, he would enjoy the kingdom; and if heshould die in the battle, he would be elevated to the heavenly planetswhose doors were wide open to him. Fighting would be for his benefit ineither case.
TEXT 33
atha cet tvam imam dharmyam
sangramam na karisyasitatah sva-dharmam kirtim cahitva papam avapsyasi
SYNONYMSatha--therefore; cet--if; tvam--you; imam--this; dharmyam--religious
duty; sangramam--fighting; na--do not; karisyasi--perform; tatah--then;sva-dharmam--your religious duty; kirtim--reputation; ca--also; hitva--losing; papam--sinful reaction; avapsyasi--do gain.
TRANSLATIONIf, however, you do not fight this religious war, then you will
certainly incur sins for neglecting your duties and thus lose yourreputation as a fighter.
PURPORT
Arjuna was a famous fighter, and he attained fame by fighting many
great demigods, including even Lord Siva. After fighting and defeatingLord Siva in the dress of a hunter, Arjuna pleased the lord andreceived as a reward a weapon called pasupata-astra. Everyone knew thathe was a great warrior. Even Dronacarya gave him benedictions andawarded him the special weapon by which he could kill even his teacher.So he was credited with so many military certificates from manyauthorities, including his adopted father Indra, the heavenly king. Butif he abandoned the battle, he would not only neglect his specific dutyas a ksatriya, but he would lose all fame and good name and thusprepare his royal road to hell. In other words, he would go to hell,not by fighting, but by withdrawing from battle.
TEXT 34
akirtim capi bhutani
kathayisyanti te 'vyayamsambhavitasya cakirtirmaranad atiricyate
SYNONYMSakirtim--infamy; ca--also; api--over and above; bhutani--all people;
kathayisyanti--will speak; te--of you; avyayam--forever; sambhavitasya--for a respectable man; ca--also; akirtih--ill fame; maranat--thandeath; atiricyate--becomes more than.
TRANSLATIONPeople will always speak of your infamy, and for one who has been
honored, dishonor is worse than death.
PURPORTBoth as a friend and philosopher to Arjuna, Lord Krsna now gives His
final judgment regarding Arjuna's refusal to fight. The Lord says,"Arjuna, if you leave the battlefield, people will call you a cowardeven before your actual fight. And if you think that people may callyou bad names but that you will save your life by fleeing thebattlefield, then My advice is that you'd better die in the battle. Fora respectable man like you, ill fame is worse than death. So, youshould not flee for fear of your life; better die in the battle. Thatwill save you from the ill fame of misusing My friendship and losingyour prestige in society."So, the final judgment of the Lord was for Arjuna to die in the battleand not withdraw.
TEXT 35
bhayad ranad uparatam
mamsyante tvam maha-rathahyesam ca tvam bahu-matobhutva yasyasi laghavam
SYNONYMS
bhayat--out of fear; ranat--from the battlefield; uparatam--ceased;
mamsyante--will consider; tvam--unto you; maha-rathah--the greatgenerals; yesam--of those who; ca--also; tvam--you; bahu-matah--ingreat estimation; bhutva--will become; yasyasi--will go; laghavam--decreased in value.
TRANSLATIONThe great generals who have highly esteemed your name and fame will
think that you have left the battlefield out of fear only, and thusthey will consider you a coward.
PURPORTLord Krsna continued to give His verdict to Arjuna: "Do not think that
the great generals like Duryodhana, Karna, and other contemporarieswill think that you have left the battlefield out of compassion foryour brothers and grandfather. They will think that you have left outof fear for your life. And thus their high estimation of yourpersonality will go to hell."
TEXT 36
avacya-vadams ca bahun
vadisyanti tavahitahnindantas tava samarthyamtato duhkhataram nu kim
SYNONYMSavacya--unkind; vadan--fabricated words; ca--also; bahun--many;
vadisyanti--will say; tava--your; ahitah--enemies; nindantah--whilevilifying; tava--your; samarthyam--ability; tatah--thereafter; duhkha-taram--more painful; nu--of course; kim--what is there.
TRANSLATIONYour enemies will describe you in many unkind words and scorn your
ability. What could be more painful for you?
PURPORTLord Krsna was astonished in the beginning at Arjuna's uncalled-for
plea for compassion, and He described his compassion as befitting thenon-Aryans. Now in so many words, He has proved His statements againstArjuna's so-called compassion.
TEXT 37
hato va prapsyasi svargam
jitva va bhoksyase mahimtasmad uttistha kaunteyayuddhaya krta-niscayah
SYNONYMShatah--being killed; va--either; prapsyasi--you will gain; svargam--the
heavenly kingdom; jitva--by conquering; va--or; bhoksyase--you enjoy;
mahim--the world; tasmat--therefore; uttistha--get up; kaunteya--O son
of Kunti; yuddhaya--to fight; krta--determined; niscayah--uncertainty.
TRANSLATIONO son of Kunti, either you will be killed on the battlefield and attain
the heavenly planets, or you will conquer and enjoy the earthlykingdom. Therefore get up and fight with determination.
PURPORTEven though there was no certainty of victory for Arjuna's side, he
still had to fight; for, even being killed there, he could be elevatedinto the heavenly planets.
TEXT 38
sukha-duhkhe same krtva
labhalabhau jayajayautato yuddhaya yujyasvanaivam papam avapsyasi
SYNONYMSsukha--happiness; duhkhe--in distress; same--in equanimity; krtva--
doing so; labha-alabhau--both in loss and profit; jaya-ajayau--both indefeat and victory; tatah--thereafter; yuddhaya--for the sake offighting; yujyasva--do fight; na--never; evam--in this way; papam--sinful reaction; avapsyasi--you will gain.
TRANSLATIONDo thou fight for the sake of fighting, without considering happiness
or distress, loss or gain, victory or defeat--and, by so doing, youshall never incur sin.
PURPORTLord Krsna now directly says that Arjuna should fight for the sake of
fighting because He desires the battle. There is no consideration ofhappiness or distress, profit or gain, victory or defeat in theactivities of Krsna consciousness. That everything should be performedfor the sake of Krsna is transcendental consciousness; so there is noreaction to material activities. He who acts for his own sensegratification, either in goodness or in passion, is subject to thereaction, good or bad. But he who has completely surrendered himself inthe activities of Krsna consciousness is no longer obliged to anyone,nor is he a debtor to anyone, as one is in the ordinary course ofactivities. It is said:
devarsi-bhutapta-nrnam pitrnam
na kinkaro nayam rni ca rajansarvatmana yah saranam saranyamgato mukundam parihrtya kartam
"Anyone who has completely surrendered unto Krsna, Mukunda, giving up
all other duties, is no longer a debtor, nor is he obliged to anyone--not the demigods, nor the sages, nor the people in general, nor
kinsmen, nor humanity, nor forefathers." (Bhag. 11.5.41) That is the
indirect hint given by Krsna to Arjuna in this verse, and the matterwill be more clearly explained in the following verses.
TEXT 39
esa te 'bhihita sankhye
buddhir yoge tv imam srnubuddhya yukto yaya parthakarma-bandham prahasyasi
SYNONYMSesa--all these; te--unto you; abhihita--described; sankhye--by
analytical study; buddhih--intelligence; yoge--work without fruitiveresult; tu--but; imam--this; srnu--just hear; buddhya--by intelligence;yuktah--dovetailed; yaya--by which; partha--O son of Prtha; karma-bandham--bondage of reaction; prahasyasi--you can be released from.
TRANSLATIONThus far I have declared to you the analytical knowledge of sankhya
philosophy. Now listen to the knowledge of yoga whereby one workswithout fruitive result. O son of Prtha, when you act by suchintelligence, you can free yourself from the bondage of works.
PURPORTAccording to the Nirukti, or the Vedic dictionary, sankhya means that
which describes phenomena in detail, and sankhya refers to thatphilosophy which describes the real nature of the soul. And yogainvolves controlling the senses. Arjuna's proposal not to fight wasbased on sense gratification. Forgetting his prime duty, he wanted tocease fighting because he thought by not killing his relatives andkinsmen he would be happier than by enjoying the kingdom by conqueringhis cousins and brothers, the sons of Dhrtarastra. In both ways, thebasic principles were for sense gratification. Happiness derived fromconquering them and happiness derived by seeing kinsmen alive are bothon the basis of personal sense gratification, for there is a sacrificeof wisdom and duty. Krsna, therefore, wanted to explain to Arjuna thatby killing the body of his grandfather he would not be killing the soulproper, and He explained that all individual persons, including theLord Himself, are eternal individuals; they were individuals in thepast, they are individuals in the present, and they will continue toremain individuals in the future, because all of us are individualsouls eternally, and we simply change our bodily dress in differentmanners. But, actually, we keep our individuality even after liberationfrom the bondage of material dress. An analytical study of the soul andthe body has been very graphically explained by Lord Krsna. And thisdescriptive knowledge of the soul and the body from different angles ofvision has been described here as Sankhya, in terms of the Niruktidictionary. This Sankhya has nothing to do with the Sankhya philosophyof the atheist Kapila. Long before the imposter Kapila's Sankhya, theSankhya philosophy was expounded in the Srimad-Bhagavatam by the trueLord Kapila, the incarnation of Lord Krsna, who explained it to Hismother, Devahuti. It is clearly explained by Him that the purusa, orthe Supreme Lord, is active and that He creates by looking over theprakrti. This is accepted in the Vedas and in the Gita. The description
in the Vedas indicates that the Lord glanced over the prakrti, or
nature, and impregnated it with atomic individual souls. All theseindividuals are working in the material world for sense gratification,and under the spell of material energy they are thinking of beingenjoyers. This mentality is dragged to the last point of liberationwhen the living entity wants to become one with the Lord. This is thelast snare of maya or sense gratificatory illusion, and it is onlyafter many, many births of such sense gratificatory activities that agreat soul surrenders unto Vasudeva, Lord Krsna, thereby fulfilling thesearch after the ultimate truth.Arjuna has already accepted Krsna as his spiritual master bysurrendering himself unto Him: sisyas te 'ham sadhi mam tvam prapannam.Consequently, Krsna will now tell him about the working process inbuddhi-yoga, or karma-yoga, or in other words, the practice ofdevotional service only for the sense gratification of the Lord. Thisbuddhi-yoga is clearly explained in Chapter Ten, verse ten, as beingdirect communion with the Lord, who is sitting as Paramatma ineveryone's heart. But such communion does not take place withoutdevotional service. One who is therefore situated in devotional ortranscendental loving service to the Lord, or, in other words, in Krsnaconsciousness, attains to this stage of buddhi-yoga by the specialgrace of the Lord. The Lord says, therefore, that only to those who arealways engaged in devotional service out of transcendental love does Heaward the pure knowledge of devotion in love. In that way the devoteecan reach Him easily in the ever-blissful kingdom of God.Thus the buddhi-yoga mentioned in this verse is the devotional serviceof the Lord, and the word Sankhya mentioned herein has nothing to dowith the atheistic sankhya-yoga enunciated by the imposter Kapila. Oneshould not, therefore, misunderstand that the sankhya-yoga mentionedherein has any connection with the atheistic Sankhya. Nor did thatphilosophy have any influence during that time; nor would Lord Krsnacare to mention such godless philosophical speculations. Real Sankhyaphilosophy is described by Lord Kapila in the Srimad-Bhagavatam, buteven that Sankhya has nothing to do with the current topics. Here,Sankhya means analytical description of the body and the soul. LordKrsna made an analytical description of the soul just to bring Arjunato the point of buddhi-yoga, or bhakti-yoga. Therefore, Lord Krsna'sSankhya and Lord Kapila's Sankhya, as described in the Bhagavatam, areone and the same. They are all bhakti-yoga. He said, therefore, thatonly the less intelligent class of men make a distinction betweensankhya-yoga and bhakti-yoga.Of course, atheistic sankhya-yoga has nothing to do with bhakti-yoga,yet the unintelligent claim that the atheistic sankhya-yoga is referredto in the Bhagavad-gita.One should therefore understand that buddhi-yoga means to work in Krsnaconsciousness, in the full bliss and knowledge of devotional service.One who works for the satisfaction of the Lord only, however difficultsuch work may be, is working under the principles of buddhi-yoga andfinds himself always in transcendental bliss. By such transcendentalengagement, one achieves all transcendental qualities automatically, bythe grace of the Lord, and thus his liberation is complete in itself,without his making extraneous endeavors to acquire knowledge. There ismuch difference between work in Krsna consciousness and work forfruitive results, especially in the matter of sense gratification forachieving results in terms of family or material happiness. Buddhi-yogais therefore the transcendental quality of the work that we perform.
TEXT 40
nehabhikrama-naso 'sti
pratyavayo na vidyatesv-alpam apy asya dharmasyatrayate mahato bhayat
SYNONYMSna--there is not; iha--in this world; abhikrama--endeavoring; nasah--
loss; asti--there is; pratyavayah--diminution; na--never; vidyate--there is; su-alpam--a little; api--although; asya--of this; dharmasya--of this occupation; trayate--releases; mahatah--of very great; bhayat--danger.
TRANSLATIONIn this endeavor there is no loss or diminution, and a little
advancement on this path can protect one from the most dangerous typeof fear.
PURPORTActivity in Krsna consciousness, or acting for the benefit of Krsna
without expectation of sense gratification, is the highesttranscendental quality of work. Even a small beginning of such activityfinds no impediment, nor can that small beginning be lost at any stage.Any work begun on the material plane has to be completed, otherwise thewhole attempt becomes a failure. But any work begun in Krsnaconsciousness has a permanent effect, even though not finished. Theperformer of such work is therefore not at a loss even if his work inKrsna consciousness is incomplete. One percent done in Krsnaconsciousness bears permanent results, so that the next beginning isfrom the point of two percent; whereas, in material activity, without ahundred percent success, there is no profit. Ajamila performed his dutyin some percentage of Krsna consciousness, but the result he enjoyed atthe end was a hundred percent, by the grace of the Lord. There is anice verse in this connection in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.5.17):
tyaktva sva-dharmam caranambujam harer
bhajann apakvo 'tha patet tato yadiyatra kva vabhadram abhud amusya kimko vartha apto 'bhajatam sva-dharmatah
"If someone gives up self-gratificatory pursuits and works in Krsna
consciousness and then falls down on account of not completing hiswork, what loss is there on his part? And, what can one gain if oneperforms his material activities perfectly?" Or, as the Christians say,"What profiteth a man if he gain the whole world yet suffers the lossof his eternal soul?"Material activities and their results end with the body. But work inKrsna consciousness carries a person again to Krsna consciousness, evenafter the loss of the body. At least one is sure to have a chance inthe next life of being born again as a human being, either in thefamily of a great cultured brahmana or in a rich aristocratic familythat will give one a further chance for elevation. That is the uniquequality of work done in Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 41
vyavasayatmika buddhir
ekeha kuru-nandanabahu-sakha hy anantas cabuddhayo 'vyavasayinam
SYNONYMSvyavasaya-atmika--resolute Krsna consciousness; buddhih--intelligence;
eka--only one; iha--in this world; kuru-nandana--O beloved child of theKurus; bahu-sakhah--various branches; hi--indeed; anantah--unlimited;ca--also; buddhayah--intelligence; avyavasayinam--of those who are notin Krsna consciousness.
TRANSLATIONThose who are on this path are resolute in purpose, and their aim is
one. O beloved child of the Kurus, the intelligence of those who areirresolute is many-branched.
PURPORTA strong faith in Krsna consciousness that one shall be elevated to the
highest perfection of life is called vyavasayatmika intelligence. TheCaitanya-caritamrta (Madhya 22.62) states:
'sraddha'-sabde----visvasa kahe sudrdha niscaya
krsne bhakti kaile sarva-karma krta haya
Faith means unflinching trust in something sublime. When one is engaged
in the duties of Krsna consciousness, he need not act in relationshipto the material world with obligations to family traditions, humanity,or nationality. Fruitive activities are the engagements of one'sreactions from past good or bad deeds. When one is awake in Krsnaconsciousness, he need no longer endeavor for good results in hisactivities. When one is situated in Krsna consciousness, all activitiesare on the absolute plane, for they are no longer subject to dualitieslike good and bad. The highest perfection of Krsna consciousness isrenunciation of the material conception of life. This state isautomatically achieved by progressive Krsna consciousness. The resolutepurpose of a person in Krsna consciousness is based on knowledge,Vasudevah sarvam iti sa mahatma su-durlabhah, by which one comes toknow perfectly that Vasudeva, or Krsna is the root of all manifestedcauses. As water on the root of a tree is automatically distributed tothe leaves and branches, in Krsna consciousness one can render thehighest service to everyone--namely self, family, society, country,humanity, etc. If Krsna is satisfied by one's actions, then everyonewill be satisfied.Service in Krsna consciousness is, however, best practiced under theable guidance of a spiritual master who is a bona fide representativeof Krsna, who knows the nature of the student and who can guide him toact in Krsna consciousness. As such, to be well-versed in Krsnaconsciousness one has to act firmly and obey the representative ofKrsna, and one should accept the instruction of the bona fide spiritualmaster as one's mission in life. Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakurainstructs us, in his famous prayers for the spiritual master asfollows:
yasya prasadad bhagavat-prasado
yasyaprasadan na gatih kuto 'pidhyayan stuvams tasya yasas tri-sandhyamvande guroh sri-caranaravindam
"By satisfaction of the spiritual master, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead becomes satisfied. And by not satisfying the spiritual master,there is no chance of being promoted to the plane of Krsnaconsciousness. I should, therefore, meditate and pray for his mercythree times a day, and offer my respectful obeisances unto him, myspiritual master."The whole process, however, depends on perfect knowledge of the soulbeyond the conception of the body--not theoretically but practically,when there is no longer a chance for sense gratification manifested infruitive activities. One who is not firmly fixed in mind is diverted byvarious types of fruitive acts.
TEXTS 42-43
yam imam puspitam vacam
pravadanty avipascitahveda-vada-ratah parthananyad astiti vadinah
kamatmanah svarga-para
janma-karma-phala-pradamkriya-visesa-bahulambhogaisvarya-gatim prati
SYNONYMSyam imam--all these; puspitam--flowery; vacam--words; pravadanti--say;
avipascitah--men with a poor fund of knowledge; veda-vada-ratah--supposed followers of the Vedas; partha--O son of Prtha; na--never;anyat--anything else; asti--there is; iti--thus; vadinah--advocates;kama-atmanah--desirous of sense gratification; svarga-parah--aiming toachieve heavenly planets; janma-karma-phala-pradam--resulting infruitive actions, good birth, etc.; kriya-visesa--pompous ceremonies;bahulam--various; bhoga--sense enjoyment; aisvarya--opulence; gatim--progress; prati--towards.
TRANSLATIONMen of small knowledge are very much attached to the flowery words of
the Vedas, which recommend various fruitive activities for elevation toheavenly planets, resultant good birth, power, and so forth. Beingdesirous of sense gratification and opulent life, they say that thereis nothing more than this.
PURPORTPeople in general are not very intelligent, and due to their ignorance
they are most attached to the fruitive activities recommended in thekarma-kanda portions of the Vedas. They do not want anything more thansense gratificatory proposals for enjoying life in heaven, where wineand women are available and material opulence is very common. In theVedas many sacrifices are recommended for elevation to the heavenlyplanets, especially the jyotistoma sacrifices. In fact, it is stated
that anyone desiring elevation to heavenly planets must perform these
sacrifices, and men with a poor fund of knowledge think that this isthe whole purpose of Vedic wisdom. It is very difficult for suchinexperienced persons to be situated in the determined action of Krsnaconsciousness. As fools are attached to the flowers of poisonous treeswithout knowing the results of such attractions, similarlyunenlightened men are attracted by such heavenly opulence and the senseenjoyment thereof.In the karma-kanda section of the Vedas it is said that those whoperform the four monthly penances become eligible to drink the somarasabeverages to become immortal and happy forever. Even on this earth someare very eager to have somarasa to become strong and fit to enjoy sensegratifications. Such persons have no faith in liberation from materialbondage, and they are very much attached to the pompous ceremonies ofVedic sacrifices. They are generally sensual, and they do not wantanything other than the heavenly pleasures of life. It is understoodthat there are gardens called Nandana-kanana in which there is goodopportunity for association with angelic, beautiful women and having aprofuse supply of somarasa wine. Such bodily happiness is certainlysensual; therefore there are those who are purely attached to material,temporary happiness, as lords of the material world.
TEXT 44
bhogaisvarya-prasaktanam
tayapahrta-cetasamvyavasayatmika buddhihsamadhau na vidhiyate
SYNONYMSbhoga--material enjoyment; aisvarya--opulence; prasaktanam--those who
are so attached; taya--by such things; apahrta-cetasam--bewildered inmind; vyavasaya-atmika--fixed determination; buddhih--devotionalservice of the Lord; samadhau--in the controlled mind; na--never;vidhiyate--does take place.
TRANSLATIONIn the minds of those who are too attached to sense enjoyment and
material opulence, and who are bewildered by such things, the resolutedetermination of devotional service to the Supreme Lord does not takeplace.
PURPORTSamadhi means "fixed mind." The Vedic dictionary, the Nirukti, says,
samyag adhiyate 'sminn atma-tattva-yathatmyam: "When the mind is fixedfor understanding the self, it is called samadhi." Samadhi is neverpossible for persons interested in material sense enjoyment, nor forthose who are bewildered by such temporary things. They are more orless condemned by the process of material energy.
TEXT 45
trai-gunya-visaya veda
nistrai-gunyo bhavarjunanirdvandvo nitya-sattva-stho
niryoga-ksema atmavan
SYNONYMStrai-gunya--pertaining to the three modes of material nature; visayah--
on the subject matter; vedah--Vedic literatures; nistrai-gunyah--in apure state of spiritual existence; bhava--be; arjuna--O Arjuna;nirdvandvah--free from the pains of opposites; nitya-sattva-sthah--everremaining in sattva (goodness); niryoga-ksemah--free from (the thoughtof) acquisition and preservation; atma-van--established in the self.
TRANSLATIONThe Vedas mainly deal with the subject of the three modes of material
nature. Rise above these modes, O Arjuna. Be transcendental to all ofthem. Be free from all dualities and from all anxieties for gain andsafety, and be established in the self.
PURPORTAll material activities involve actions and reactions in the three
modes of material nature. They are meant for fruitive results, whichcause bondage in the material world. The Vedas deal mostly withfruitive activities to gradually elevate the general public from thefield of sense gratification to a position on the transcendental plane.Arjuna, as a student and friend of Lord Krsna, is advised to raisehimself to the transcendental position of Vedanta philosophy where, inthe beginning, there is brahma-jijnasa, or questions on the supremetranscendence. All the living entities who are in the material worldare struggling very hard for existence. For them the Lord, aftercreation of the material world, gave the Vedic wisdom advising how tolive and get rid of the material entanglement. When the activities forsense gratification, namely the karma-kanda chapter, are finished, thenthe chance for spiritual realization is offered in the form of theUpanisads, which are part of different Vedas, as the Bhagavad-gita is apart of the fifth Veda, namely the Mahabharata. The Upanisads mark thebeginning of transcendental life.As long as the material body exists, there are actions and reactions inthe material modes. One has to learn tolerance in the face of dualitiessuch as happiness and distress, or cold and warmth, and by toleratingsuch dualities become free from anxieties regarding gain and loss. Thistranscendental position is achieved in full Krsna consciousness whenone is fully dependent on the good will of Krsna.
TEXT 46
yavan artha udapane
sarvatah samplutodaketavan sarvesu vedesubrahmanasya vijanatah
SYNONYMSyavan--all that; arthah--is meant; uda-pane--in a well of water;
sarvatah--in all respects; sampluta-udake--in a great reservoir ofwater; tavan--similarly; sarvesu--in all; vedesu--Vedic literatures;brahmanasya--of the man who knows the Supreme Brahman; vijanatah--ofone who is in complete knowledge.
TRANSLATION
All purposes that are served by the small pond can at once be served by
the great reservoirs of water. Similarly, all the purposes of the Vedascan be served to one who knows the purpose behind them.
PURPORTThe rituals and sacrifices mentioned in the karma-kanda division of the
Vedic literature are to encourage gradual development of self-realization. And the purpose of self-realization is clearly stated inthe Fifteenth Chapter of the Bhagavad-gita (15.15): the purpose ofstudying the Vedas is to know Lord Krsna, the primeval cause ofeverything. So, self-realization means understanding Krsna and one'seternal relationship with Him. The relationship of the living entitieswith Krsna is also mentioned in the Fifteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gita(15.7). The living entities are parts and parcels of Krsna; therefore,revival of Krsna consciousness by the individual living entity is thehighest perfectional stage of Vedic knowledge. This is confirmed in theSrimad-Bhagavatam (3.33.7) as follows:
aho bata sva-paco 'to gariyan
yaj-jihvagre vartate nama tubhyamtepus tapas te juhuvuh sasnur aryabrahmanucur nama grnanti ye te
"O my Lord, a person who is chanting Your holy name, although born of a
low family like that of a candala [dog-eater] is situated on thehighest platform of self-realization. Such a person must have performedall kinds of penances and sacrifices according to Vedic rituals andstudied the Vedic literatures many, many times after taking his bath inall the holy places of pilgrimage. Such a person is considered to bethe best of the Aryan family."So one must be intelligent enough to understand the purpose of theVedas, without being attached to the rituals only, and must not desireto be elevated to the heavenly kingdoms for a better quality of sensegratification. It is not possible for the common man in this age tofollow all the rules and regulations of Vedic rituals and theinjunctions of the Vedanta and the Upanisads. It requires much time,energy, knowledge and resources to execute the purposes of the Vedas.This is hardly possible in this age. The best purpose of Vedic cultureis served, however, by chanting the holy name of the Lord, asrecommended by Lord Caitanya, the deliverer of all fallen souls. WhenLord Caitanya was asked by a great Vedic scholar, PrakasanandaSarasvati, why He, the Lord, was chanting the holy name of the Lordlike a sentimentalist instead of studying Vedanta philosophy, the Lordreplied that His spiritual master found Him to be a great fool and thusasked Him to chant the holy name of Lord Krsna. He did so, and becameecstatic like a madman. In this Age of Kali, most of the population isfoolish and not adequately educated to understand Vedanta philosophy;the best purpose of Vedanta philosophy is served by inoffensivelychanting the holy name of the Lord. Vedanta is the last word in Vedicwisdom, and the author and knower of the Vedanta philosophy is LordKrsna; and the highest Vedantist is the great soul who takes pleasurein chanting the holy name of the Lord. That is the ultimate purpose ofall Vedic mysticism.
TEXT 47
karmany evadhikaras te
ma phalesu kadacanama karma-phala-hetur bhurma te sango 'stv akarmani
SYNONYMSkarmani--prescribed duties; eva--certainly; adhikarah--right; te--of
you; ma--never; phalesu--in the fruits; kadacana--at any time; ma--never; karma-phala--in the result of the work; hetuh--cause; bhuh--become; ma--never; te--of you; sangah--attachment; astu--be there;akarmani--in not doing.
TRANSLATIONYou have a right to perform your prescribed duty, but you are not
entitled to the fruits of action. Never consider yourself to be thecause of the results of your activities, and never be attached to notdoing your duty.
PURPORTThere are three considerations here: prescribed duties, capricious
work, and inaction. Prescribed duties refer to activities performedwhile one is in the modes of material nature. Capricious work meansactions without the sanction of authority, and inaction means notperforming one's prescribed duties. The Lord advised that Arjuna not beinactive, but that he perform his prescribed duty without beingattached to the result. One who is attached to the result of his workis also the cause of the action. Thus he is the enjoyer or sufferer ofthe result of such actions.As far as prescribed duties are concerned, they can be fitted intothree subdivisions, namely routine work, emergency work and desiredactivities. Routine work, in terms of the scriptural injunctions, isdone without desire for results. As one has to do it, obligatory workis action in the mode of goodness. Work with results becomes the causeof bondage; therefore such work is not auspicious. Everyone has hisproprietary right in regard to prescribed duties, but should actwithout attachment to the result; such disinterested obligatory dutiesdoubtlessly lead one to the path of liberation.Arjuna was therefore advised by the Lord to fight as a matter of dutywithout attachment to the result. His nonparticipation in the battle isanother side of attachment. Such attachment never leads one to the pathof salvation. Any attachment, positive or negative, is cause forbondage. Inaction is sinful. Therefore, fighting as a matter of dutywas the only auspicious path of salvation for Arjuna.
TEXT 48
yoga-sthah kuru karmani
sangam tyaktva dhananjayasiddhy-asiddhyoh samo bhutvasamatvam yoga ucyate
SYNONYMS
yoga-sthah--steadfast in yoga; kuru--perform; karmani--your duties;
sangam--attachment; tyaktva--having abandoned; dhananjaya--ODhananjaya; siddhi-asiddhyoh--success and failure; samah--the same;bhutva--having become; samatvam--evenness of mind; yogah--yoga; ucyate--is called.
TRANSLATIONBe steadfast in yoga, O Arjuna. Perform your duty and abandon all
attachment to success or failure. Such evenness of mind is called yoga.
PURPORTKrsna tells Arjuna that he should act in yoga. And what is that yoga?
Yoga means to concentrate the mind upon the Supreme by controlling theever-disturbing senses. And who is the Supreme? The Supreme is theLord. And because He Himself is telling Arjuna to fight, Arjuna hasnothing to do with the results of the fight. Gain or victory areKrsna's concern; Arjuna is simply advised to act according to thedictation of Krsna. The following of Krsna's dictation is real yoga,and this is practiced in the process called Krsna consciousness. ByKrsna consciousness only can one give up the sense of proprietorship.One has to become the servant of Krsna, or the servant of the servantof Krsna. That is the right way to discharge duty in Krsnaconsciousness, which alone can help one to act in yoga.Arjuna is a ksatriya, and as such he is participating in thevarnasrama-dharma institution. It is said in the Visnu Purana that inthe varnasrama-dharma, the whole aim is to satisfy Visnu. No one shouldsatisfy himself, as is the rule in the material world, but one shouldsatisfy Krsna. So, unless one satisfies Krsna, one cannot correctlyobserve the principles of varnasrama-dharma. Indirectly, Arjuna wasadvised to act as Krsna told him.
TEXT 49
durena hy avaram karma
buddhi-yogad dhananjayabuddhau saranam anvicchakrpanah phala-hetavah
SYNONYMSdurena--by discarding it at a long distance; hi--certainly; avaram--
abominable; karma--activities; buddhi-yogat--on the strength of Krsnaconsciousness; dhananjaya--O conqueror of wealth; buddhau--in suchconsciousness; saranam--full surrender; anviccha--desire; krpanah--themisers; phala-hetavah--those desiring fruitive action.
TRANSLATIONO Dhananjaya, rid yourself of all fruitive activities by devotional
service, and surrender fully to that consciousness. Those who want toenjoy the fruits of their work are misers.
PURPORTOne who has actually come to understand one's constitutional position
as an eternal servitor of the Lord gives up all engagements save
working in Krsna consciousness. As already explained, buddhi-yoga means
transcendental loving service to the Lord. Such devotional service isthe right course of action for the living entity. Only misers desire toenjoy the fruit of their own work just to be further entangled inmaterial bondage. Except for work in Krsna consciousness, allactivities are abominable because they continually bind the worker tothe cycle of birth and death. One should therefore never desire to bethe cause of work. Everything should be done in Krsna consciousness,for the satisfaction of Krsna. Misers do not know how to utilize theassets of riches which they acquire by good fortune or by hard labor.One should spend all energies working in Krsna consciousness, and thatwill make one's life successful. Like the misers, unfortunate personsdo not employ their human energy in the service of the Lord.
TEXT 50
buddhi-yukto jahatiha
ubhe sukrta-duskrtetasmad yogaya yujyasvayogah karmasu kausalam
SYNONYMSbuddhi-yuktah--one who is engaged in devotional service; jahati--can
get rid of; iha--in this life; ubhe--in both; sukrta-duskrte--in goodand bad results; tasmat--therefore; yogaya--for the sake of devotionalservice; yujyasva--be so engaged; yogah--Krsna consciousness; karmasu--in all activities; kausalam--art.
TRANSLATIONA man engaged in devotional service rids himself of both good and bad
actions even in this life. Therefore strive for yoga, O Arjuna, whichis the art of all work.
PURPORTSince time immemorial each living entity has accumulated the various
reactions of his good and bad work. As such, he is continuouslyignorant of his real constitutional position. One's ignorance can beremoved by the instruction of the Bhagavad-gita which teaches one tosurrender unto Lord Sri Krsna in all respects and become liberated fromthe chained victimization of action and reaction, birth after birth.Arjuna is therefore advised to act in Krsna consciousness, thepurifying process of resultant action.
TEXT 51
karma-jam buddhi-yukta hi
phalam tyaktva manisinahjanma-bandha-vinirmuktahpadam gacchanty anamayam
SYNONYMSkarma-jam--because of fruitive activities; buddhi-yuktah--being done in
devotional service; hi--certainly; phalam--results; tyaktva--giving up;manisinah--devotees who are great sages; janma-bandha--the bondage of
birth and death; vinirmuktah--liberated soul; padam--position;
gacchanti--reached; anamayam--without miseries.
TRANSLATIONThe wise, engaged in devotional service, take refuge in the Lord, and
free themselves from the cycle of birth and death by renouncing thefruits of action in the material world. In this way they can attainthat state beyond all miseries.
PURPORTThe liberated living entities seek that place where there are no
material miseries. The Bhagavatam (10.14.58) says:
samasrita ye pada-pallava-plavam
mahat-padam punya-yaso murarehbhavambudhir vatsa-padam param padampadam padam yad vipadam na tesam
"For one who has accepted the boat of the lotus feet of the Lord, who
is the shelter of the cosmic manifestation and is famous as Mukunda orthe giver of mukti, the ocean of the material world is like the watercontained in a calf's hoofprint. param padam, or the place where thereare no material miseries, or Vaikuntha, is his goal, not the placewhere there is danger in every step of life."Owing to ignorance, one does not know that this material world is amiserable place where there are dangers at every step. Out of ignoranceonly, less intelligent persons try to adjust to the situation byfruitive activities, thinking that the resultant actions will make themhappy. They do not know that no kind of material body anywhere withinthe universe can give life without miseries. The miseries of life,namely birth, death, old age and diseases, are present everywherewithin the material world. But one who understands his realconstitutional position as the eternal servitor of the Lord, and thusknows the position of the Personality of Godhead, engages himself inthe transcendental loving service of the Lord. Consequently he becomesqualified to enter into the Vaikuntha planets, where there is neithermaterial, miserable life nor the influence of time and death. To knowone's constitutional position means to know also the sublime positionof the Lord. One who wrongly thinks that the living entity's positionand the Lord's position are on the same level is to be understood to bein darkness and therefore unable to engage himself in the devotionalservice of the Lord. He becomes a lord himself and thus paves the wayfor the repetition of birth and death. The one who, understanding thathis position is to serve, transfers himself to the service of the Lord,at once becomes eligible for Vaikunthaloka. Service for the cause ofthe Lord is called karma-yoga or buddhi-yoga, or in plain words,devotional service to the Lord.
TEXT 52
yada te moha-kalilam
buddhir vyatitarisyatitada gantasi nirvedamsrotavyasya srutasya ca
SYNONYMS
yada--when; te--your; moha--illusory; kalilam--dense forest; buddhih--
transcendental service with intelligence; vyatitarisyati--surpasses;tada--at that time; ganta asi--you shall go; nirvedam--callousness;srotavyasya--all that is to be heard; srutasya--all that is alreadyheard; ca--also.
TRANSLATIONWhen your intelligence has passed out of the dense forest of delusion,
you shall become indifferent to all that has been heard and all that isto be heard.
PURPORTThere are many good examples in the lives of the great devotees of the
Lord of those who became indifferent to the rituals of the Vedas simplyby devotional service to the Lord. When a person factually understandsKrsna and his relationship with Krsna, he naturally becomes completelyindifferent to the rituals of fruitive activities, even though anexperienced brahmana. Sri Madhavendra Puri, a great devotee and acaryain the line of the devotees, says:
sandhya-vandana bhadram astu bhavato bhoh snana tubhyam namo
bho devah pitaras ca tarpana-vidhau naham ksamah ksamyatamyatra kvapi nisadya yadava-kulottamasya kamsa-dvisahsmaram smaram agham harami tad alam manye kim anyena me
"O Lord, in my prayers three times a day, all glory to you. Bathing, I
offer my obeisances unto you. O demigods! O forefathers! Please excuseme for my inability to offer you my respects. Now wherever I sit, I canremember the great descendant of the Yadu dynasty [Krsna], the enemy ofKamsa, and thereby I can free myself from all sinful bondage. I thinkthis is sufficient for me."The Vedic rites and rituals are imperative for neophytes: comprehendingall kinds of prayer three times a day, taking a bath early in themorning, offering respects to the forefathers, etc. But, when one isfully in Krsna consciousness and is engaged in His transcendentalloving service, one becomes indifferent to all these regulativeprinciples because he has already attained perfection. If one can reachthe platform of understanding by service to the Supreme Lord Krsna, hehas no longer to execute different types of penances and sacrifices asrecommended in revealed scriptures. And, similarly, if one has notunderstood that the purpose of the Vedas is to reach Krsna and simplyengages in the rituals, etc., then he is uselessly wasting time in suchengagements. Persons in Krsna consciousness transcend the limit ofsabda-brahma, or the range of the Vedas and Upanisads.
TEXT 53
sruti-vipratipanna te
yada sthasyati niscalasamadhav acala buddhistada yogam avapsyasi
SYNONYMS
sruti--Vedic revelation; vipratipanna--without being influenced by the
fruitive results of the Vedas; te--your; yada--when; sthasyati--remains; niscala--unmoved; samadhau--in transcendental consciousness,or Krsna consciousness; acala--unflinching; buddhih--intelligence;tada--at that time; yogam--self-realization; avapsyasi--you willachieve.
TRANSLATIONWhen your mind is no longer disturbed by the flowery language of the
Vedas, and when it remains fixed in the trance of self-realization,then you will have attained the divine consciousness.
PURPORTTo say that one is in samadhi is to say that one has fully realized
Krsna consciousness; that is, one in full samadhi has realized Brahman,Paramatma and Bhagavan. The highest perfection of self-realization isto understand that one is eternally the servitor of Krsna and thatone's only business is to discharge one's duties in Krsnaconsciousness. A Krsna conscious person, or unflinching devotee of theLord, should not be disturbed by the flowery language of the Vedas norbe engaged in fruitive activities for promotion to the heavenlykingdom. In Krsna consciousness, one comes directly into communion withKrsna, and thus all directions from Krsna may be understood in thattranscendental state. One is sure to achieve results by such activitiesand attain conclusive knowledge. One has only to carry out the ordersof Krsna or His representative, the spiritual master.
TEXT 54
arjuna uvaca
sthita-prajnasya ka bhasasamadhi-sthasya kesavasthita-dhih kim prabhasetakim asita vrajeta kim
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; sthita-prajnasya--of one who is situated in
fixed Krsna consciousness; ka--what; bhasa--language; samadhi-sthasya--of one situated in trance; kesava--O Krsna; sthita-dhih--one fixed inKrsna consciousness; kim--what; prabhaseta--speak; kim--how; asita--does remain; vrajeta--walks; kim--how.
TRANSLATIONArjuna said: O Krsna, what are the symptoms of one whose consciousness
is thus merged in transcendence? How does he speak, and what is hislanguage? How does he sit, and how does he walk?
PURPORTAs there are symptoms for each and every man, in terms of his
particular situation, similarly one who is Krsna conscious has hisparticular nature--talking, walking, thinking, feeling, etc. As a richman has his symptoms by which he is known as a rich man, as a diseasedman has his symptoms, by which he is known as diseased, or as a learned
man has his symptoms, so a man in transcendental consciousness of Krsna
has specific symptoms in various dealings. One can know his specificsymptoms from the Bhagavad-gita. Most important is how the man in Krsnaconsciousness speaks, for speech is the most important quality of anyman. It is said that a fool is undiscovered as long as he does notspeak, and certainly a well-dressed fool cannot be identified unless hespeaks, but as soon as he speaks, he reveals himself at once. Theimmediate symptom of a Krsna conscious man is that he speaks only ofKrsna and of matters relating to Him. Other symptoms then automaticallyfollow, as stated below.
TEXT 55
sri-bhagavan uvaca
prajahati yada kamansarvan partha mano-gatanatmany evatmana tustahsthita-prajnas tadocyate
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; prajahati-
-gives up; yada--when; kaman--desires for sense gratification; sarvan--of all varieties; partha--O son of Prtha; manah-gatan--of mentalconcoction; atmani--in the pure state of the soul; eva--certainly;atmana--by the purified mind; tustah--satisfied; sthita-prajnah--transcendentally situated; tada--at that time; ucyate--is said.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: O Partha, when a man gives up all varieties of
sense desire which arise from mental concoction, and when his mindfinds satisfaction in the self alone, then he is said to be in puretranscendental consciousness.
PURPORTThe Bhagavatam affirms that any person who is fully in Krsna
consciousness, or devotional service of the Lord, has all the goodqualities of the great sages, whereas a person who is not sotranscendentally situated has no good qualifications, because he issure to be taking refuge in his own mental concoctions. Consequently,it is rightly said herein that one has to give up all kinds of sensedesire manufactured by mental concoction. Artificially, such sensedesires cannot be stopped. But if one is engaged in Krsnaconsciousness, then, automatically, sense desires subside withoutextraneous efforts. Therefore, one has to engage himself in Krsnaconsciousness without hesitation, for this devotional service willinstantly help one onto the platform of transcendental consciousness.The highly developed soul always remains satisfied in himself byrealizing himself as the eternal servitor of the Supreme Lord. Such atranscendentally situated person has no sense desires resulting frompetty materialism; rather, he remains always happy in his naturalposition of eternally serving the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 56
duhkhesv anudvigna-manah
sukhesu vigata-sprhah
vita-raga-bhaya-krodhahsthita-dhir munir ucyate
SYNONYMSduhkhesu--in the threefold miseries; anudvigna-manah--without being
agitated in mind; sukhesu--in happiness; vigata-sprhah--without beingtoo interested; vita--free from; raga--attachment; bhaya--fear;krodhah--anger; sthita-dhih--one who is steady; munih--a sage; ucyate--is called.
TRANSLATIONOne who is not disturbed in spite of the threefold miseries, who is not
elated when there is happiness, and who is free from attachment, fearand anger, is called a sage of steady mind.
PURPORTThe word muni means one who can agitate his mind in various ways for
mental speculation without coming to a factual conclusion. It is saidthat every muni has a different angle of vision, and unless a munidiffers from other munis, he cannot be called a muni in the strictsense of the term. Nasav rsir yasya matam na bhinnam (Mahabharata,Vana-parva 313.117). But a sthita-dhir muni, as mentioned herein by theLord, is different from an ordinary muni. The sthita-dhir muni isalways in Krsna consciousness, for he has exhausted all his business ofcreative speculation. He has surpassed the stage of mental speculationsand has come to the conclusion that Lord Sri Krsna, or Vasudeva, iseverything (vasudevah sarvam iti sa mahatma su-durlabhah). He is calleda muni fixed in mind. Such a fully Krsna conscious person is not at alldisturbed by the onslaughts of the threefold miseries, for he acceptsall miseries as the mercy of the Lord, thinking himself only worthy ofmore trouble due to his past misdeeds; and he sees that his miseries,by the grace of the Lord, are minimized to the lowest. Similarly, whenhe is happy he gives credit to the Lord, thinking himself unworthy ofthe happiness; he realizes that it is due only to the Lord's grace thathe is in such a comfortable condition and able to render better serviceto the Lord. And, for the service of the Lord, he is always daring andactive and is not influenced by attachment or aversion. Attachmentmeans accepting things for one's own sense gratification, anddetachment is the absence of such sensual attachment. But one fixed inKrsna consciousness has neither attachment nor detachment because hislife is dedicated in the service of the Lord. Consequently he is not atall angry even when his attempts are unsuccessful. A Krsna consciousperson is always steady in his determination.
TEXT 57
yah sarvatranabhisnehas
tat tat prapya subhasubhamnabhinandati na dvestitasya prajna pratisthita
SYNONYMS
yah--one who; sarvatra--everywhere; anabhisnehah--without affection;
tat--that; tat--that; prapya--achieving; subha--good; asubham--evil;na--never; abhinandati--praise; na--never; dvesti--envies; tasya--his;prajna--perfect knowledge; pratisthita--fixed.
TRANSLATIONHe who is without attachment, who does not rejoice when he obtains
good, nor lament when he obtains evil, is firmly fixed in perfectknowledge.
PURPORTThere is always some upheaval in the material world which may be good
or evil. One who is not agitated by such material upheavals, who isunaffected by good and evil, is to be understood to be fixed in Krsnaconsciousness. As long as one is in the material world there is alwaysthe possibility of good and evil because this world is full of duality.But one who is fixed in Krsna consciousness is not affected by good andevil, because he is simply concerned with Krsna, who is all-goodabsolute. Such consciousness in Krsna situates one in a perfecttranscendental position called, technically, samadhi.
TEXT 58
yada samharate cayam
kurmo 'nganiva sarvasahindriyanindriyarthebhyastasya prajna pratisthita
SYNONYMSyada--when; samharate--winds up; ca--also; ayam--all these; kurmah--
tortoise; angani--limbs; iva--like; sarvasah--altogether; indriyani--senses; indriya-arthebhyah--from the sense objects; tasya--his; prajna--consciousness; pratisthita--fixed up.
TRANSLATIONOne who is able to withdraw his senses from sense objects, as the
tortoise draws its limbs within the shell, is to be understood as trulysituated in knowledge.
PURPORTThe test of a yogi, devotee, or self-realized soul is that he is able
to control the senses according to his plan. Most people, however, areservants of the senses and are thus directed by the dictation of thesenses. That is the answer to the question as to how the yogi issituated. The senses are compared to venomous serpents. They want toact very loosely and without restriction. The yogi, or the devotee,must be very strong to control the serpents--like a snake charmer. Henever allows them to act independently. There are many injunctions inthe revealed scriptures; some of them are do-not's, and some of themare do's. Unless one is able to follow the do's and the do-not's,restricting oneself from sense enjoyment, it is not possible to befirmly fixed in Krsna consciousness. The best example, set herein, isthe tortoise. The tortoise can at any moment wind up his senses and
exhibit them again at any time for particular purposes. Similarly, the
senses of the Krsna conscious persons are used only for some particularpurpose in the service of the Lord and are withdrawn otherwise. Keepingthe senses always in the service of the Lord is the example set by theanalogy of the tortoise, who keeps the senses within.
TEXT 59
visaya vinivartante
niraharasya dehinahrasa-varjam raso 'py asyaparam drstva nivartate
SYNONYMSvisayah--objects for sense enjoyment; vinivartante--are practiced to be
refrained from; niraharasya--by negative restrictions; dehinah--for theembodied; rasa-varjam--giving up the taste; rasah--sense of enjoyment;api--although there is; asya--his; param--far superior things; drstva--by experiencing; nivartate--ceases from.
TRANSLATIONThe embodied soul may be restricted from sense enjoyment, though the
taste for sense objects remains. But, ceasing such engagements byexperiencing a higher taste, he is fixed in consciousness.
PURPORTUnless one is transcendentally situated, it is not possible to cease
from sense enjoyment. The process of restriction from sense enjoymentby rules and regulations is something like restricting a diseasedperson from certain types of eatables. The patient, however, neitherlikes such restrictions nor loses his taste for eatables. Similarly,sense restriction by some spiritual process like astanga-yoga, in thematter of yama, niyama, asana, pranayama, pratyahara, dharana, dhyana,etc., is recommended for less intelligent persons who have no betterknowledge. But one who has tasted the beauty of the Supreme Lord Krsna,in the course of his advancement in Krsna consciousness, no longer hasa taste for dead material things. Therefore, restrictions are there forthe less intelligent neophytes in the spiritual advancement of life,but such restrictions are only good if one actually has a taste forKrsna consciousness. When one is actually Krsna conscious, heautomatically loses his taste for pale things.
TEXT 60
yatato hy api kaunteya
purusasya vipascitahindriyani pramathiniharanti prasabham manah
SYNONYMSyatatah--while endeavoring; hi--certainly; api--in spite of; kaunteya--
O son of Kunti; purusasya--of the man; vipascitah--full ofdiscriminating knowledge; indriyani--the senses; pramathini--
stimulated; haranti--throws forcefully; prasabham--by force; manah--the
mind.
TRANSLATIONThe senses are so strong and impetuous, O Arjuna, that they forcibly
carry away the mind even of a man of discrimination who is endeavoringto control them.
PURPORTThere are many learned sages, philosophers and transcendentalists who
try to conquer the senses, but in spite of their endeavors, even thegreatest of them sometimes fall victim to material sense enjoyment dueto the agitated mind. Even Visvamitra, a great sage and perfect yogi,was misled by Menaka into sex enjoyment, although the yogi wasendeavoring for sense control with severe types of penance and yogapractice. And, of course, there are so many similar instances in thehistory of the world. Therefore, it is very difficult to control themind and senses without being fully Krsna conscious. Without engagingthe mind in Krsna, one cannot cease such material engagements. Apractical example is given by Sri Yamunacarya, a great saint anddevotee, who says:
yad-avadhi mama cetah krsna-padaravinde
nava-nava-rasa-dhamany udyatam rantum asittad-avadhi bata nari-sangame smaryamanebhavati mukha-vikarah susthu nisthivanam ca
"Since my mind has been engaged in the service of the lotus feet of
Lord Krsna, and I have been enjoying an ever new transcendental humor,whenever I think of sex life with a woman, my face at once turns fromit, and I spit at the thought."Krsna consciousness is such a transcendentally nice thing thatautomatically material enjoyment becomes distasteful. It is as if ahungry man had satisfied his hunger by a sufficient quantity ofnutritious eatables. Maharaja Ambarisa also conquered a great yogi,Durvasa Muni, simply because his mind was engaged in Krsnaconsciousness (sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayor vacamsi vaikuntha-gunanuvarnane).
TEXT 61
tani sarvani samyamya
yukta asita mat-parahvase hi yasyendriyanitasya prajna pratisthita
SYNONYMStani--those senses; sarvani--all; samyamya--keeping under control;
yuktah--being engaged; asita--being so situated; mat-parah--inrelationship with Me; vase--in full subjugation; hi--certainly; yasya--one whose; indriyani--senses; tasya--his; prajna--consciousness;pratisthita--fixed.
TRANSLATION
One who restrains his senses and fixes his consciousness upon Me, is
known as a man of steady intelligence.
PURPORTThat the highest conception of yoga perfection is Krsna consciousness
is clearly explained in this verse. And, unless one is Krsna conscious,it is not at all possible to control the senses. As cited above, thegreat sage Durvasa Muni picked a quarrel with Maharaja Ambarisa, andDurvasa Muni unnecessarily became angry out of pride and thereforecould not check his senses. On the other hand, the king, although notas powerful a yogi as the sage, but a devotee of the Lord, silentlytolerated all the sage's injustices and thereby emerged victorious. Theking was able to control his senses because of the followingqualifications, as mentioned in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (9.4.18-20):
sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayor
vacamsi vaikuntha-gunanuvarnanekarau harer mandira-marjanadisusrutim cakaracyuta-sat-kathodaye
mukunda-lingalaya-darsane drsau
tad-bhrtya-gatra-sparse 'nga-sangamamghranam ca tat-pada-saroja-saurabhesrimat-tulasya rasanam tad-arpite
padau hareh ksetra-padanusarpane
siro hrsikesa-padabhivandanekamam ca dasye na tu kama-kamyayayathottama-sloka-janasraya ratih
"King Ambarisa fixed his mind on the lotus feet of Lord Krsna, engaged
his words in describing the abode of the Lord, his hands in cleansingthe temple of the Lord, his ears in hearing the pastimes of the Lord,his eyes in seeing the form of the Lord, his body in touching the bodyof the devotee, his nostrils in smelling the flavor of the flowersoffered to the lotus feet of the Lord, his tongue in tasting the tulasileaves offered to Him, his legs in traveling to the holy place whereHis temple is situated, his head in offering obeisances unto the Lord,and his desires in fulfilling the desires of the Lord... and all thesequalifications made him fit to become a mat-para devotee of the Lord."The word mat-para is most significant in this connection. How one canbecome mat-para is described in the life of Maharaja Ambarisa. SrilaBaladeva Vidyabhusana, a great scholar and acarya in the line of themat-para, remarks: mad-bhakti-prabhavena sarvendriya-vijaya-purvikasvatma-drstih sulabheti bhavah. "The senses can be completelycontrolled only by the strength of devotional service to Krsna." Also,the example of fire is sometimes given: "As the small flames withinburn everything within the room, similarly Lord Visnu, situated in theheart of the yogi, burns up all kinds of impurities." The Yoga-sutraalso prescribes meditation on Visnu, and not meditation on the void.The so-called yogis who meditate on something which is not the Visnuform simply waste their time in a vain search after somephantasmagoria. We have to be Krsna conscious--devoted to thePersonality of Godhead. This is the aim of the real yoga.
TEXT 62
dhyayato visayan pumsah
sangas tesupajayatesangat sanjayate kamahkamat krodho 'bhijayate
SYNONYMSdhyayatah--while contemplating; visayan--sense objects; pumsah--of the
person; sangah--attachment; tesu--in the sense objects; upajayate--develops; sangat--attachment; sanjayate--develops; kamah--desire;kamat--from desire; krodhah--anger; abhijayate--becomes manifest.
TRANSLATIONWhile contemplating the objects of the senses, a person develops
attachment for them, and from such attachment lust develops, and fromlust anger arises.
PURPORTOne who is not Krsna conscious is subjected to material desires while
contemplating the objects of the senses. The senses require realengagements, and if they are not engaged in the transcendental lovingservice of the Lord, they will certainly seek engagement in the serviceof materialism. In the material world everyone, including Lord Siva andLord Brahma--to say nothing of other demigods in the heavenly planets--is subjected to the influence of sense objects, and the only method toget out of this puzzle of material existence is to become Krsnaconscious. Lord Siva was deep in meditation, but when Parvati agitatedhim for sense pleasure, he agreed to the proposal, and as a resultKartikeya was born. When Haridasa Thakura was a young devotee of theLord, he was similarly allured by the incarnation of Maya-devi, butHaridasa easily passed the test because of his unalloyed devotion toLord Krsna. As illustrated in the above-mentioned verse of SriYamunacarya, a sincere devotee of the Lord shuns all material senseenjoyment due to his higher taste for spiritual enjoyment in theassociation of the Lord. That is the secret of success. One who is not,therefore, in Krsna consciousness, however powerful he may be incontrolling the senses by artificial repression, is sure ultimately tofail, for the slightest thought of sense pleasure will agitate him togratify his desires.
TEXT 63
krodhad bhavati sammohah
sammohat smrti-vibhramahsmrti-bhramsad buddhi-nasobuddhi-nasat pranasyati
SYNONYMSkrodhat--from anger; bhavati--takes place; sammohah--perfect illusion;
sammohat--from illusion; smrti--of memory; vibhramah--bewilderment;smrti-bhramsat--after bewilderment of memory; buddhi-nasah--loss ofintelligence; buddhi-nasat--and from loss of intelligence; pranasyati--falls down.
TRANSLATION
From anger, delusion arises, and from delusion bewilderment of memory.
When the memory is bewildered, intelligence is lost, and whenintelligence is lost, one falls down again into the material pool.
PURPORTBy development of Krsna consciousness one can know that everything has
its use in the service of the Lord. Those who are without knowledge ofKrsna consciousness artificially try to avoid material objects, and asa result, although they desire liberation from material bondage, theydo not attain to the perfect stage of renunciation. On the other hand,a person in Krsna consciousness knows how to use everything in theservice of the Lord; therefore he does not become a victim of materialconsciousness. For example, for an impersonalist, the Lord, or theAbsolute, being impersonal, cannot eat. Whereas an impersonalist triesto avoid good eatables, a devotee knows that Krsna is the supremeenjoyer and that He eats all that is offered to Him in devotion. So,after offering good eatables to the Lord, the devotee takes theremnants, called prasadam. Thus everything becomes spiritualized andthere is no danger of a downfall. The devotee takes prasadam in Krsnaconsciousness, whereas the nondevotee rejects it as material. Theimpersonalist, therefore, cannot enjoy life due to his artificialrenunciation; and for this reason, a slight agitation of the mind pullshim down again into the pool of material existence. It is said thatsuch a soul, even though rising up to the point of liberation, fallsdown again due to his not having support in devotional service.
TEXT 64
raga-dvesa-vimuktais tu
visayan indriyais caranatma-vasyair vidheyatmaprasadam adhigacchati
SYNONYMSraga--attachment; dvesa--detachment; vimuktaih--by one who has been
free from such things; tu--but; visayan--sense objects; indriyaih--bythe senses; caran--acting; atma-vasyaih--one who has control over;vidheya-atma--one who follows regulated freedom; prasadam--the mercy ofthe Lord; adhigacchati--attains.
TRANSLATIONOne who can control his senses by practicing the regulative principles
of freedom can obtain the complete mercy of the Lord and thus becomefree from all attachment and aversion.
PURPORTIt is already explained that one may externally control the senses by
some artificial process, but unless the senses are engaged in thetranscendental service of the Lord, there is every chance of a fall.Although the person in full Krsna consciousness may apparently be onthe sensual plane, because of his being Krsna conscious, he has noattachment to sensual activities. The Krsna conscious person isconcerned only with the satisfaction of Krsna, and nothing else.
Therefore he is transcendental to all attachment. If Krsna wants, the
devotee can do anything which is ordinarily undesirable; and if Krsnadoes not want, he shall not do that which he would have ordinarily donefor his own satisfaction. Therefore to act or not to act is within hiscontrol because he acts only under the direction of Krsna. Thisconsciousness is the causeless mercy of the Lord, which the devotee canachieve in spite of his being attached to the sensual platform.
TEXT 65
prasade sarva-duhkhanam
hanir asyopajayateprasanna-cetaso hy asubuddhih paryavatisthate
SYNONYMSprasade--on achievement of the causeless mercy of the Lord; sarva--of
all; duhkhanam--material miseries; hanih--destruction; asya--his;upajayate--takes place; prasanna-cetasah--of the happy-minded; hi--certainly; asu--very soon; buddhih--intelligence; pari--sufficiently;avatisthate--established.
TRANSLATIONFor one who is so situated in the Divine consciousness, the threefold
miseries of material existence exist no longer; in such a happy state,one's intelligence soon becomes steady.
TEXT 66
nasti buddhir ayuktasya
na cayuktasya bhavanana cabhavayatah santirasantasya kutah sukham
SYNONYMSna asti--there cannot be; buddhih--transcendental intelligence;
ayuktasya--of one who is not connected (with Krsna consciousness); na--neither; ca--and; ayuktasya--of one devoid of Krsna consciousness;bhavana--mind fixed in happiness; na--neither; ca--and; abhavayatah--one who is not fixed; santih--peace; asantasya--of the unpeaceful;kutah--where is; sukham--happiness.
TRANSLATIONOne who is not in transcendental consciousness can have neither a
controlled mind nor steady intelligence, without which there is nopossibility of peace. And how can there be any happiness without peace?
PURPORTUnless one is in Krsna consciousness there is no possibility of peace.
So it is confirmed in the Fifth Chapter (5.29) that when oneunderstands that Krsna is the only enjoyer of all the good results ofsacrifice and penance, and that He is the proprietor of all universalmanifestations, that He is the real friend of all living entities, then
only can one have real peace. Therefore, if one is not in Krsna
consciousness, there cannot be a final goal for the mind. Disturbanceis due to want of an ultimate goal, and when one is certain that Krsnais the enjoyer, proprietor and friend of everyone and everything, thenone can, with a steady mind, bring about peace. Therefore, one who isengaged without a relationship with Krsna is certainly always indistress and is without peace, however much he may make a show of peaceand spiritual advancement in life. Krsna consciousness is a self-manifested peaceful condition which can be achieved only inrelationship with Krsna.
TEXT 67
indriyanam hi caratam
yan mano 'nuvidhiyatetad asya harati prajnamvayur navam ivambhasi
SYNONYMSindriyanam--of the senses; hi--certainly; caratam--while herding over;
yat--that; manah--mind; anuvidhiyate--becomes constantly engaged; tat--that; asya--his; harati--takes away; prajnam--intelligence; vayuh--wind; navam--a boat; iva--like; ambhasi--on the water.
TRANSLATIONAs a boat on the water is swept away by a strong wind, even one of the
senses on which the mind focuses can carry away a man's intelligence.
PURPORTUnless all of the senses are engaged in the service of the Lord, even
one of them engaged in sense gratification can deviate the devotee fromthe path of transcendental advancement. As mentioned in the life ofMaharaja Ambarisa, all of the senses must be engaged in Krsnaconsciousness, for that is the correct technique for controlling themind.
TEXT 68
tasmad yasya maha-baho
nigrhitani sarvasahindriyanindriyarthebhyastasya prajna pratisthita
SYNONYMStasmat--therefore; yasya--of one's; maha-baho--O mighty-armed one;
nigrhitani--so curbed down; sarvasah--all around; indriyani--thesenses; indriya-arthebhyah--for the sake of sense objects; tasya--his;prajna--intelligence; pratisthita--fixed.
TRANSLATIONTherefore, O mighty-armed, one whose senses are restrained from their
objects is certainly of steady intelligence.
PURPORT
As enemies are curbed by superior force, similarly the senses, can be
curbed not by any human endeavor, but only by keeping them engaged inthe service of the Lord. One who has understood this--that only byKrsna consciousness is one really established in intelligence and thatone should practice this art under the guidance of a bona fidespiritual master--is called sadhaka, or a suitable candidate forliberation.
TEXT 69
ya nisa sarva-bhutanam
tasyam jagarti samyamiyasyam jagrati bhutanisa nisa pasyato muneh
SYNONYMSya--what; nisa--is night; sarva--all; bhutanam--of living entities;
tasyam--in that; jagarti--wakeful; samyami--the self-controlled;yasyam--in which; jagrati--awake; bhutani--all beings; sa--that is;nisa--night; pasyatah--for the introspective; muneh--sage.
TRANSLATIONWhat is night for all beings is the time of awakening for the self-
controlled; and the time of awakening for all beings is night for theintrospective sage.
PURPORTThere are two classes of intelligent men. The one is intelligent in
material activities for sense gratification, and the other isintrospective and awake to the cultivation of self-realization.Activities of the introspective sage, or thoughtful man, are night forpersons materially absorbed. Materialistic persons remain asleep insuch a night due to their ignorance of self-realization. Theintrospective sage remains alert in the "night" of the materialisticmen. The sage feels transcendental pleasure in the gradual advancementof spiritual culture, whereas the man in materialistic activities,being asleep to self-realization, dreams of varieties of sensepleasure, feeling sometimes happy and sometimes distressed in hissleeping condition. The introspective man is always indifferent tomaterialistic happiness and distress. He goes on with his self-realization activities undisturbed by material reactions.
TEXT 70
apuryamanam acala-pratistham
samudram apah pravisanti yadvattadvat kama yam pravisanti sarvesa santim apnoti na kama-kami
SYNONYMSapuryamanam--always filled; acala-pratistham--steadily situated;
samudram--the ocean; apah--water; pravisanti--enter; yadvat--as;
tadvat--so; kamah--desires; yam--unto one; pravisanti--enter; sarve--
all; sah--that person; santim--peace; apnoti--achieves; na--not; kama-kami--one who desires to fulfill desires.
TRANSLATIONA person who is not disturbed by the incessant flow of desires--that
enter like rivers into the ocean which is ever being filled but isalways still--can alone achieve peace, and not the man who strives tosatisfy such desires.
PURPORTAlthough the vast ocean is always filled with water, it is always,
especially during the rainy season, being filled with much more water.But the ocean remains the same--steady; it is not agitated, nor does itcross beyond the limit of its brink. That is also true of a personfixed in Krsna consciousness. As long as one has the material body, thedemands of the body for sense gratification will continue. The devotee,however, is not in need of anything because the Lord fulfills all hismaterial necessities. Therefore he is like the ocean--always full inhimself. Desires may come to him like the waters of the rivers thatflow into the ocean, but he is steady in his activities, and he is noteven slightly disturbed by desires for sense gratification. That is theproof of a Krsna conscious man--one who has lost all inclinations formaterial sense gratification, although the desires are present. Becausehe remains satisfied in the transcendental loving service of the Lord,he can remain steady, like the ocean, and therefore enjoy full peace.Others, however, who fulfill desires even up to the limit ofliberation, what to speak of material success, never attain peace. Thefruitive workers, the salvationists, and also the yogis who are aftermystic powers, are all unhappy because of unfulfilled desires. But theperson in Krsna consciousness is happy in the service of the Lord, andhe has no desires to be fulfilled. In fact, he does not even desireliberation from the so-called material bondage. The devotees of Krsnahave no material desires, and therefore they are in perfect peace.
TEXT 71
vihaya kaman yah sarvan
pumams carati nihsprhahnirmamo nirahankarahsa santim adhigacchati
SYNONYMSvihaya--after giving up; kaman--all material desires for sense
gratification; yah--the person; sarvan--all; puman--a person; carati--lives; nihsprhah--desireless; nirmamah--without a sense ofproprietorship; nirahankarah--without false ego; sah--all; santim--perfect peace; adhigacchati--attains.
TRANSLATIONA person who has given up all desires for sense gratification, who
lives free from desires, who has given up all sense of proprietorshipand is devoid of false ego--he alone can attain real peace.
PURPORT
To become desireless means not to desire anything for sense
gratification. In other words, desire for becoming Krsna conscious isactually desirelessness. To understand one's actual position as theeternal servitor of Krsna, without falsely claiming this material bodyto be oneself and without falsely claiming proprietorship over anythingin the world, is the perfect stage of Krsna consciousness. One who issituated in this perfect stage knows that because Krsna is theproprietor of everything, therefore everything must be used for thesatisfaction of Krsna. Arjuna did not want to fight for his own sensesatisfaction, but when he became fully Krsna conscious he foughtbecause Krsna wanted him to fight. For himself there was no desire tofight, but for Krsna the same Arjuna fought to his best ability. Desirefor the satisfaction of Krsna is really desirelessness; it is not anartificial attempt to abolish desires. The living entity cannot bedesireless or senseless, but he does have to change the quality of thedesires. A materially desireless person certainly knows that everythingbelongs to Krsna (isavasyam idam sarvam), and therefore he does notfalsely claim proprietorship over anything. This transcendentalknowledge is based on self-realization--namely, knowing perfectly wellthat every living entity is the eternal part and parcel of Krsna inspiritual identity, and therefore the eternal position of the livingentity is never on the level of Krsna or greater than Him. Thisunderstanding of Krsna consciousness is the basic principle of realpeace.
TEXT 72
esa brahmi sthitih partha
nainam prapya vimuhyatisthitvasyam anta-kale 'pibrahma-nirvanam rcchati
SYNONYMSesa--this; brahmi--spiritual; sthitih--situation; partha--O son of
Prtha; na--never; enam--this; prapya--achieving; vimuhyati--bewilders;sthitva--being so situated; asyam--being so; anta-kale--at the end oflife; api--also; brahma-nirvanam--spiritual (kingdom of God); rcchati--attains.
TRANSLATIONThat is the way of the spiritual and godly life, after attaining which
a man is not bewildered. Being so situated even at the hour of death,one can enter into the kingdom of God.
PURPORTOne can attain Krsna consciousness or divine life at once, within a
second--or one may not attain such a state of life even after millionsof births. It is only a matter of understanding and accepting the fact.Khatvanga Maharaja attained this state of life just a few minutesbefore his death, by surrendering unto Krsna. Nirvana means ending theprocess of materialistic life. According to Buddhist philosophy, thereis only void after the completion of this material life, but Bhagavad-gita teaches differently. Actual life begins after the completion of
