is His gorgeous luster, which is called the brahmajyoti. He incarnates
in different forms such as Rama, Nrsimha, Varaha and Krsna, the SupremePersonality of Godhead, and He descends like a human being, as the sonof mother Yasoda, and He is known as Krsna, Govinda and Vasudeva. He isthe perfect child, husband, friend and master, and He is full with allopulences and transcendental qualities. If one remains fully consciousof these features of the Lord, he is called the highest yogi.This stage of highest perfection in yoga can be attained only bybhakti-yoga, as is confirmed in all Vedic literature:
yasya deve para bhaktir
yatha deve tatha gurautasyaite kathita hy arthahprakasante mahatmanah
"Only unto those great souls who have implicit faith in both the Lord
and the spiritual master are all the imports of Vedic knowledgeautomatically revealed." (Svetasvatara Upanisad 6.23)Bhaktir asya bhajanam tad ihamutropadhi-nairasyenamusmin manah-kalpanam, etad eva naiskarmyam. "Bhakti means devotional service to theLord which is free from desire for material profit, either in this lifeor in the next. Devoid of such inclinations, one should fully absorbthe mind in the Supreme. That is the purpose of naiskarmya." (Gopala-tapani Upanisad 1.15)These are some of the means for performance of bhakti, or Krsnaconsciousness, the highest perfectional stage of the yoga system.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Sixth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Sankhya-yoga Brahma-vidya.
Chapter 7
Knowledge of the Absolute
TEXT 1
sri-bhagavan uvaca
mayy asakta-manah parthayogam yunjan mad-asrayahasamsayam samagram mamyatha jnasyasi tac chrnu
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Lord said; mayi--unto Me; asakta-manah-
-mind attached; partha--O son of Prtha; yogam--self-realization;yunjan--so practicing; mat-asrayah--in consciousness of Me (Krsnaconsciousness); asamsayam--without doubt; samagram--completely; mam--unto Me; yatha--as much as; jnasyasi--you can know; tat--that; srnu--try to hear.
TRANSLATIONNow hear, O son of Prtha [Arjuna], how by practicing yoga in full
consciousness of Me, with mind attached to Me, you can know Me in full,free from doubt.
PURPORT
In this Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gita, the nature of Krsna
consciousness is fully described. Krsna is full in all opulences, andhow He manifests such opulences is described herein. Also, four kindsof fortunate people who become attached to Krsna and four kinds ofunfortunate people who never take to Krsna are described in thischapter.In the first six chapters of Bhagavad-gita, the living entity has beendescribed as nonmaterial spirit soul which is capable of elevatinghimself to self-realization by different types of yogas. At the end ofthe Sixth Chapter, it has been clearly stated that the steadyconcentration of the mind upon Krsna, or in other words Krsnaconsciousness, is the highest form of all yoga. By concentrating one'smind upon Krsna, one is able to know the Absolute Truth completely, butnot otherwise. Impersonal brahmajyoti or localized Paramatmarealization is not perfect knowledge of the Absolute Truth because itis partial. Full and scientific knowledge is Krsna, and everything isrevealed to the person in Krsna consciousness. In complete Krsnaconsciousness one knows that Krsna is ultimate knowledge beyond anydoubts. Different types of yoga are only steppingstones on the path ofKrsna consciousness. One who takes directly to Krsna consciousnessautomatically knows about brahmajyoti and Paramatma in full. Bypractice of Krsna consciousness yoga, one can know everything in full--namely the Absolute Truth, the living entities, the material nature,and their manifestations with paraphernalia.One should therefore begin yoga practice as directed in the last verseof the Sixth Chapter. Concentration of the mind upon Krsna the Supremeis made possible by prescribed devotional service in nine differentforms, of which sravanam is the first and most important. The Lordtherefore says to Arjuna, tac chrnu, or "Hear from Me." No one can be agreater authority than Krsna, and therefore by hearing from Him onereceives the greatest opportunity for progress in Krsna consciousness.One has therefore to learn from Krsna directly or from a pure devoteeof Krsna--and not from a nondevotee upstart, puffed up with academiceducation.In the Srimad-Bhagavatam this process of understanding Krsna, theSupreme Personality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth, is described in theSecond Chapter of the First Canto as follows:
srnvatam sva-kathah krsnah
punya-sravana-kirtanahhrdy antah-stho hy abhadranividhunoti suhrt satam
nasta-prayesv abhadresu
nityam bhagavata-sevayabhagavaty uttama-slokebhaktir bhavati naisthiki
tada rajas-tamo-bhavah
kama-lobhadayas ca yeceta etair anaviddhamsthitam sattve prasidati
evam prasanna-manaso
bhagavad-bhakti-yogatahbhagavat-tattva-vijnanammukta-sangasya jayate
bhidyate hrdaya-granthis
chidyante sarva-samsayahksiyante casya karmanidrsta evatmanisvare
"To hear about Krsna from Vedic literatures, or to hear from Him
directly through the Bhagavad-gita, is itself righteous activity. Andfor one who hears about Krsna, Lord Krsna who is dwelling in everyone'sheart, acts as a best-wishing friend and purifies the devotee whoconstantly engages in hearing of Him. In this way, a devotee naturallydevelops his dormant transcendental knowledge. As he hears more aboutKrsna from the Bhagavatam and from the devotees, he becomes fixed inthe devotional service of the Lord. By development of devotionalservice one becomes freed from the modes of passion and ignorance, andthus material lusts and avarice are diminished. When these impuritiesare wiped away, the candidate remains steady in his position of puregoodness, becomes enlivened by devotional service and understands thescience of God perfectly. Thus bhakti-yoga severs the hard knot ofmaterial affection and enables one to come at once to the stage ofasamsayam-samagram, understanding of the Supreme Absolute TruthPersonality of Godhead." (Bhag. 1.2.17-21)Therefore only by hearing from Krsna or from His devotee in Krsnaconsciousness can one understand the science of Krsna.
TEXT 2
jnanam te 'ham sa-vijnanam
idam vaksyamy asesatahyaj jnatva neha bhuyo 'nyajjnatavyam avasisyate
SYNONYMSjnanam--phenomenal knowledge; te--unto you; aham--I; sa--with;
vijnanam--noumenal knowledge; idam--this; vaksyami--shall explain;asesatah--in full; yat--which; jnatva--knowing; na--not; iha--in thisworld; bhuyah--further; anyat--anything more; jnatavyam--knowable;avasisyate--remains to be known.
TRANSLATIONI shall now declare unto you in full this knowledge both phenomenal and
noumenal, by knowing which there shall remain nothing further to beknown.
PURPORTComplete knowledge includes knowledge of the phenomenal world and the
spirit behind it. The source of both of them is transcendentalknowledge. The Lord wants to explain the above-mentioned system ofknowledge because Arjuna is Krsna's confidential devotee and friend. Inthe beginning of the Fourth Chapter this explanation was given by theLord, and it is again confirmed here: complete knowledge can beachieved only by the devotee of the Lord directly from the Lord indisciplic succession. Therefore one should be intelligent enough toknow the source of all knowledge, who is the cause of all causes andthe only object for meditation in all types of yoga practice. When thecause of all causes becomes known, then everything knowable becomes
known, and nothing remains unknown. The Vedas (Mundaka Upanisad 1.3)
say, kasmin bhagavo vijnate sarvam idam vijnatam bhavati.
TEXT 3
manusyanam sahasresu
kascid yatati siddhayeyatatam api siddhanamkascin mam vetti tattvatah
SYNONYMSmanusyanam--of men; sahasresu--out of many thousands; kascit--someone;
yatati--endeavors; siddhaye--for perfection; yatatam--of those soendeavoring; api--indeed; siddhanam--of those who have achievedperfection; kascit--someone; mam--Me; vetti--does know; tattvatah--infact.
TRANSLATIONOut of many thousands among men, one may endeavor for perfection, and
of those who have achieved perfection, hardly one knows Me in truth.
PURPORTThere are various grades of men, and out of many thousands one may be
sufficiently interested in transcendental realization to try to knowwhat is the self, what is the body, and what is the Absolute Truth.Generally mankind is simply engaged in the animal propensities, namelyeating, sleeping, defending and mating, and hardly anyone is interestedin transcendental knowledge. The first six chapters of the Gita aremeant for those who are interested in transcendental knowledge, inunderstanding the self, the Superself and the process of realization byjnana-yoga, dhyana-yoga and discrimination of the self from matter.However, Krsna can only be known by persons who are in Krsnaconsciousness. Other transcendentalists may achieve impersonal Brahmanrealization, for this is easier than understanding Krsna. Krsna is theSupreme Person, but at the same time He is beyond the knowledge ofBrahman and Paramatma. The yogis and jnanis are confused in theirattempts to understand Krsna, although the greatest of theimpersonalists, Sripada Sankaracarya, has admitted in his Gitacommentary that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But hisfollowers do not accept Krsna as such, for it is very difficult to knowKrsna, even though one has transcendental realization of impersonalBrahman.Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the cause of all causes,the primeval Lord Govinda. Isvarah paramah krsnah sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah. anadir adir govindah sarva-karana-karanam. It is verydifficult for the nondevotees to know Him. Although nondevotees declarethat the path of bhakti or devotional service is very easy, they cannotpractice it. If the path of bhakti is so easy, as the nondevotee classof men proclaim, then why do they take up the difficult path? Actuallythe path of bhakti is not easy. The so-called path of bhakti practicedby unauthorized persons without knowledge of bhakti may be easy, butwhen it is practiced factually according to the rules and regulations,the speculative scholars and philosophers fall away from the path.Srila Rupa Gosvami writes in his Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.2.101):
sruti-smrti-puranadi-
pancaratra-vidhim vinaaikantiki harer bhaktirutpatayaiva kalpate
"Devotional service of the Lord that ignores the authorized Vedic
literatures like the Upanisads, Puranas, Narada-pancaratra, etc., issimply an unnecessary disturbance in society."It is not possible for the Brahman-realized impersonalist or theParamatma-realized yogi to understand Krsna the Supreme Personality ofGodhead as the son of mother Yasoda or the charioteer of Arjuna. Eventhe great demigods are sometimes confused about Krsna (muhyanti yatsurayah). Mam tu veda na kascana: "No one knows Me as I am," the Lordsays. And if one does know Him, then sa mahatma su-durlabhah. "Such agreat soul is very rare." Therefore unless one practices devotionalservice to the Lord, he cannot know Krsna as He is (tattvatah), eventhough one is a great scholar or philosopher. Only the pure devoteescan know something of the inconceivable transcendental qualities inKrsna, in the cause of all causes, in His omnipotence and opulence, andin His wealth, fame, strength, beauty, knowledge and renunciation,because Krsna is benevolently inclined to His devotees. He is the lastword in Brahman realization, and the devotees alone can realize Him asHe is. Therefore it is said:
atah sri-krsna-namadi
na bhaved grahyam indriyaihsevonmukhe hi jihvadausvayam eva sphuraty adah
"No one can understand Krsna as He is by the blunt material senses. But
He reveals Himself to the devotees, being pleased with them for theirtranscendental loving service unto Him." (Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu1.2.234)
TEXT 4
bhumir apo 'nalo vayuh
kham mano buddhir eva caahankara itiyam mebhinna prakrtir astadha
SYNONYMSbhumih--earth; apah--water; analah--fire; vayuh--air; kham--ether;
manah--mind; buddhih--intelligence; eva--certainly; ca--and; ahankarah--false ego; iti--thus; iyam--all these; me--My; bhinna--separated;prakrtih--energies; astadha--total eight.
TRANSLATIONEarth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego--all
together these eight constitute My separated material energies.
PURPORTThe science of God analyzes the constitutional position of God and His
diverse energies. Material nature is called prakrti, or the energy of
the Lord in His different purusa incarnations (expansions) as described
in the Satvata-tantra:
visnos tu trini rupani
purusakhyany atho viduhekam tu mahatah srastrdvitiyam tv anda-samsthitamtrtiyam sarva-bhuta-sthamtani jnatva vimucyate
"For material creation, Lord Krsna's plenary expansion assumes three
Visnus. The first one, Maha-Visnu, creates the total material energy,known as mahat-tattva. The second, Garbhodakasayi Visnu, enters intoall the universes to create diversities in each of them. The third,Ksirodakasayi Visnu, is diffused as the all-pervading Supersoul in allthe universes and is known as Paramatma, who is present even within theatoms. Anyone who knows these three Visnus can be liberated frommaterial entanglement."This material world is a temporary manifestation of one of the energiesof the Lord. All the activities of the material world are directed bythese three Visnu expansions of Lord Krsna. These purusas are calledincarnations. Generally one who does not know the science of God(Krsna) assumes that this material world is for the enjoyment of theliving entities and that the living entities are the causes (purusas),controllers and enjoyers of the material energy. According to Bhagavad-gita this atheistic conclusion is false. In the verse under discussionit is stated that Krsna is the original cause of the materialmanifestation. Srimad-Bhagavatam also confirms this. The ingredients ofthe material manifestation are separated energies of the Lord. Even thebrahmajyoti, which is the ultimate goal of the impersonalists, is aspiritual energy manifested in the spiritual sky. There are nospiritual diversities in the brahmajyoti as there are in theVaikunthalokas, and the impersonalist accepts this brahmajyoti as theultimate eternal goal. The Paramatma manifestation is also a temporaryall-pervasive aspect of the Ksirodakasayi Visnu. The Paramatmamanifestation is not eternal in the spiritual world. Therefore thefactual Absolute Truth is the Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsna. Heis the complete energetic person, and He possesses different separatedand internal energies.In the material energy, the principal manifestations are eight, asabove mentioned. Out of these, the first five manifestations, namelyearth, water, fire, air and sky, are called the five gigantic creationsor the gross creations, within which the five sense objects areincluded. They are the manifestations of physical sound, touch, form,taste and smell. Material science comprises these ten items and nothingmore. But the other three items, namely mind, intelligence and falseego, are neglected by the materialists. Philosophers who deal withmental activities are also not perfect in knowledge because they do notknow the ultimate source, Krsna. The false ego--"I am," and "It ismine," which constitute the basic principle of material existence--includes ten sense organs for material activities. Intelligence refersto the total material creation, called the mahat-tattva. Therefore fromthe eight separated energies of the Lord are manifest the twenty-fourelements of the material world, which are the subject matter of Sankhyaatheistic philosophy; they are originally offshoots from Krsna'senergies and are separated from Him, but atheistic Sankhya philosopherswith a poor fund of knowledge do not know Krsna as the cause of allcauses. The subject matter for discussion in the Sankhya philosophy is
only the manifestation of the external energy of Krsna, as it is
described in the Bhagavad-gita.
TEXT 5
apareyam itas tv anyam
prakrtim viddhi me paramjiva-bhutam maha-bahoyayedam dharyate jagat
SYNONYMSapara--inferior; iyam--this; itah--besides this; tu--but; anyam--
another; prakrtim--energy; viddhi--just try to understand; me--My;param--superior; jiva-bhutam--the living entities; maha-baho--O mighty-armed one; yaya--by whom; idam--this; dharyate--being utilized orexploited; jagat--the material world.
TRANSLATIONBesides this inferior nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is a
superior energy of Mine, which comprises all the living entities whoare struggling with material nature and are sustaining the universe.
PURPORTHere it is clearly mentioned that living entities belong to the
superior nature (or energy) of the Supreme Lord. The inferior energy ismatter manifested in different elements, namely earth, water, fire,air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego. Both forms of materialnature, namely gross (earth, etc.) and subtle (mind, etc.), areproducts of the inferior energy. The living entities, who areexploiting these inferior energies for different purposes, are thesuperior energy of the Supreme Lord, and it is due to this energy thatthe entire material world functions. The cosmic manifestation has nopower to act unless it is moved by the superior energy, the livingentity. Energies are always controlled by the energetic, and thereforeliving entities are always controlled by the Lord--they have noindependent existence. They are never equally powerful, asunintelligent men think. The distinction between the living entitiesand the Lord is described in Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.87.30) as follows:
aparimita dhruvas tanu-bhrto yadi sarva-gatas
tarhi na sasyateti niyamo dhruva netarathaajani ca yan-mayam tad avimucya niyantr bhavetsamam anujanatam yad amatam mata-dustataya
"O Supreme Eternal! If the embodied living entities were eternal and
all-pervading like You, then they would not be under Your control. Butif the living entities are accepted as minute energies of YourLordship, then they are at once subject to Your supreme control.Therefore real liberation entails surrender by the living entities toYour control, and that surrender will make them happy. In thatconstitutional position only can they be controllers. Therefore, menwith limited knowledge who advocate the monistic theory that God andthe living entities are equal in all respects are actually misleadingthemselves and others."
The Supreme Lord Krsna is the only controller, and all living entities
are controlled by Him. These living entities are His superior energybecause the quality of their existence is one and the same with theSupreme, but they are never equal to the Lord in quantity of power.While exploiting the gross and subtle inferior energy (matter), thesuperior energy (the living entity) forgets his real spiritual mind andintelligence. This forgetfulness is due to the influence of matter uponthe living entity. But when the living entity becomes free from theinfluence of the illusory material energy, he attains the stage calledmukti, or liberation. The false ego, under the influence of materialillusion, thinks, "I am matter, and material acquisitions are mine."His actual position is realized when he is liberated from all materialideas, including the conception of his becoming one in all respectswith God. Therefore one may conclude that the Gita confirms the livingentity to be only one of the multi-energies of Krsna; and when thisenergy is freed from material contamination, it becomes fully Krsnaconscious, or liberated.
TEXT 6
etad-yonini bhutani
sarvanity upadharayaaham krtsnasya jagatahprabhavah pralayas tatha
SYNONYMSetat--these two natures; yonini--source of birth; bhutani--everything
created; sarvani--all; iti--thus; upadharaya--know; aham--I; krtsnasya--all-inclusive; jagatah--of the world; prabhavah--source ofmanifestation; pralayah--annihilation; tatha--as well as.
TRANSLATIONOf all that is material and all that is spiritual in this world, know
for certain that I am both its origin and dissolution.
PURPORTEverything that exists is a product of matter and spirit. Spirit is the
basic field of creation, and matter is created by spirit. Spirit is notcreated at a certain stage of material development. Rather, thismaterial world is manifested only on the basis of spiritual energy.This material body is developed because spirit is present withinmatter; a child grows gradually to boyhood and then to manhood becauseof that superior energy, spirit soul, being present. Similarly, theentire cosmic manifestation of the gigantic universe is developedbecause of the presence of the Supersoul, Visnu. Therefore spirit andmatter, which combine together to manifest this gigantic universalform, are originally two energies of the Lord, and consequently theLord is the original cause of everything. A fragmental part and parcelof the Lord, namely, the living entity, may by manipulation of materialenergy construct a skyscraper, a factory, or city, but he cannot creatematter out of nothing, and he certainly cannot construct a planet or auniverse. The cause of the universe is the Supersoul, Krsna, theSupreme creator of all individual souls and the original cause of allcauses, as the Katha Upanisad (2.2.13) confirms. (Nityo nityanamcetanas cetananam.)
TEXT 7
mattah parataram nanyat
kincid asti dhananjayamayi sarvam idam protamsutre mani-gana iva
SYNONYMSmattah--beyond Myself; para-taram--superior; na--not; anyat kincit--
anything else; asti--there is; dhananjaya--O conqueror of wealth; mayi--in Me; sarvam--all that be; idam--which we see; protam--strung; sutre--on a thread; mani-ganah--pearls; iva--likened.
TRANSLATIONO conqueror of wealth [Arjuna], there is no truth superior to Me.
Everything rests upon Me, as pearls are strung on a thread.
PURPORTThere is a common controversy over whether the Supreme Absolute Truth
is personal or impersonal. As far as Bhagavad-gita is concerned, theAbsolute Truth is the Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna, and this isconfirmed in every step. In this verse, in particular, it is stressedthat the Absolute Truth is a person. That the Personality of Godhead isthe Supreme Absolute Truth is also the affirmation of the Brahma-samhita: isvarah paramah krsnah sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah; that is, theSupreme Absolute Truth Personality of Godhead is Lord Krsna, who is theprimeval Lord, the reservoir of all pleasure, Govinda, and the eternalform of complete bliss and knowledge. These authorities leave no doubtthat the Absolute Truth is the Supreme Person, the cause of all causes.The impersonalist, however, argues on the strength of the Vedic versiongiven in the Svetasvatara Upanisad (3.10): tato yad uttarataram tadarupam anamayam. ya etad vidur amrtas te bhavanti athetare duhkhamevapiyanti. "In the material world Brahma, the primeval living entitywithin the universe, is understood to be the supreme amongst thedemigods, human beings and lower animals. But beyond Brahma there isthe Transcendence who has no material form and is free from allmaterial contaminations. Anyone who can know Him also becomestranscendental, but those who do not know Him suffer the miseries ofthe material world."The impersonalist puts more stress on the word arupam. But this arupamis not impersonal. It indicates the transcendental form of eternity,bliss and knowledge as described in the Brahma-samhita quoted above.Other verses in the Svetasvatara Upanisad (3.8-9) substantiate this asfollows:
vedaham etam purusam mahantam
aditya-varnam tamasah parastattam eva viditvati mrtyum etinanyah pantha vidyate 'yanaya
yasmat param naparam asti kincid
yasman naniyo no jyayo 'sti kincitvrksa iva stabdho divi tisthaty ekastenedam purnam purusena sarvam
"I know that Supreme Personality of Godhead who is transcendental to
all material conceptions of darkness. Only he who knows Him cantranscend the bonds of birth and death. There is no way for liberationother than this knowledge of that Supreme Person."There is no truth superior to that Supreme Person because He is thesupermost. He is smaller than the smallest, and He is greater than thegreatest. He is situated as a silent tree, and He illumines thetranscendental sky, and as a tree spreads its roots, He spreads Hisextensive energies."From these verses one concludes that the Supreme Absolute Truth is theSupreme Personality of Godhead who is all-pervading by His multi-energies, both material and spiritual.
TEXT 8
raso 'ham apsu kaunteya
prabhasmi sasi-suryayohpranavah sarva-vedesusabdah khe paurusam nrsu
SYNONYMSrasah--taste; aham--I; apsu--in water; kaunteya--O son of Kunti; prabha
asmi--I am the light; sasi-suryayoh--in the sun and the moon; pranavah--the letters a-u-m; sarva--in all; vedesu--in the Vedas; sabdah--soundvibration; khe--in the ether; paurusam--ability; nrsu--in man.
TRANSLATIONO son of Kunti [Arjuna], I am the taste of water, the light of the sun
and the moon, the syllable om in the Vedic mantras; I am the sound inether and ability in man.
PURPORTThis verse explains how the Lord is all-pervasive by His diverse
material and spiritual energies. The Supreme Lord can be preliminarilyperceived by His different energies, and in this way He is realizedimpersonally. As the demigod in the sun is a person and is perceived byhis all-pervading energy, the sunshine, similarly the Lord, although inHis eternal abode, is perceived by His all-pervading, diffusiveenergies. The taste of water is the active principle of water. No onelikes to drink sea water because the pure taste of water is mixed withsalt. Attraction for water depends on the purity of the taste, and thispure taste is one of the energies of the Lord. The impersonalistperceives the presence of the Lord in water by its taste, and thepersonalist also glorifies the Lord for His kindly supplying water toquench man's thirst. That is the way of perceiving the Supreme.Practically speaking, there is no conflict between personalism andimpersonalism. One who knows God knows that the impersonal conceptionand personal conception are simultaneously present in everything andthat there is no contradiction. Therefore Lord Caitanya established Hissublime doctrine: acintya bheda-and-abheda-tattva--simultaneously oneand different.The light of the sun and the moon is also originally emanating from thebrahmajyoti, which is the impersonal effulgence of the Lord. Similarlypranava or the omkara transcendental sound in the beginning of every
Vedic hymn to address the Supreme Lord also emanates from Him. Because
the impersonalists are very much afraid of addressing the Supreme LordKrsna by His innumerable names, they prefer to vibrate thetranscendental sound omkara. But they do not realize that omkara is thesound representation of Krsna. The jurisdiction of Krsna consciousnessextends everywhere, and one who knows Krsna consciousness is blessed.Those who do not know Krsna are in illusion, and so knowledge of Krsnais liberation, and ignorance of Him is bondage.
TEXT 9
punyo gandhah prthivyam ca
tejas casmi vibhavasaujivanam sarva-bhutesutapas casmi tapasvisu
SYNONYMSpunyah--original; gandhah--fragrance; prthivyam--in the earth; ca--
also; tejah--temperature; ca--also; asmi--I am; vibhavasau--in thefire; jivanam--life; sarva--all; bhutesu--living entities; tapah--penance; ca--also; asmi--I am; tapasvisu--in those who practicepenance.
TRANSLATIONI am the original fragrance of the earth, and I am the heat in fire. I
am the life of all that lives, and I am the penances of all ascetics.
PURPORTPunya means that which is not decomposed; punya is original. Everything
in the material world has a certain flavor or fragrance, as the flavorand fragrance in a flower, or in the earth, in water, in fire, in air,etc. The uncontaminated flavor, the original flavor, which permeateseverything, is Krsna. Similarly, everything has a particular originaltaste, and this taste can be changed by the mixture of chemicals. Soeverything original has some smell, some fragrance, and some taste.Vibhava means fire. Without fire we cannot run factories, we cannotcook, etc., and that fire is Krsna. The heat in the fire is Krsna.According to Vedic medicine, indigestion is due to a low temperature inthe belly. So even for digestion fire is needed. In Krsna consciousnesswe become aware that earth, water, fire, air and every activeprinciple, all chemicals and all material elements are due to Krsna.The duration of man's life is also due to Krsna. Therefore by the graceof Krsna, man can prolong his life or diminish it. So Krsnaconsciousness is active in every sphere.
TEXT 10
bijam mam sarva-bhutanam
viddhi partha sanatanambuddhir buddhimatam asmitejas tejasvinam aham
SYNONYMS
bijam--the seed; mam--unto Me; sarva-bhutanam--of all living entities;
viddhi--try to understand; partha--O son of Prtha; sanatanam--original,eternal; buddhih--intelligence; buddhi-matam--of the intelligent; asmi--I am; tejah--prowess; tejasvinam--of the powerful; aham--I am.
TRANSLATIONO son of Prtha, know that I am the original seed of all existences, the
intelligence of the intelligent, and the prowess of all powerful men.
PURPORTBijam means seed; Krsna is the seed of everything. In contact with
material nature, the seed fructifies into various living entities,movable and inert. Birds, beasts, men and many other living creaturesare moving living entities; trees and plants, however, are inert--theycannot move, but only stand. Every entity is contained within the scopeof 8,400,000 species of life; some of them are moving and some of themare inert. In all cases, however, the seed of their life is Krsna. Asstated in Vedic literature, Brahman, or the Supreme Absolute Truth, isthat from which everything is emanating. Krsna is Parabrahman, theSupreme Spirit. Brahman is impersonal and Parabrahman is personal.Impersonal Brahman is situated in the personal aspect--that is statedin Bhagavad-gita. Therefore, originally, Krsna is the source ofeverything. He is the root. As the root of a tree maintains the wholetree, Krsna, being the original root of all things, maintainseverything in this material manifestation. This is also confirmed inthe Vedic literature. Yato va imani bhutani jayante. "The SupremeAbsolute Truth is that from which everything is born." He is the primeeternal among all eternals. He is the supreme living entity of allliving entities, and He alone is maintaining all life. Krsna also saysthat He is the root of all intelligence. Unless a person is intelligenthe cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna.
TEXT 11
balam balavatam caham
kama-raga-vivarjitamdharmaviruddho bhutesukamo 'smi bharatarsabha
SYNONYMSbalam--strength; bala-vatam--of the strong; ca--and; aham--I am; kama--
passion; raga--attachment; vivarjitam--devoid of; dharma-aviruddhah--not against the religious principles; bhutesu--in all beings; kamah--sex life; asmi--I am; bharata-rsabha--O lord of the Bharatas.
TRANSLATIONI am the strength of the strong, devoid of passion and desire. I am sex
life which is not contrary to religious principles, O lord of theBharatas [Arjuna].
PURPORTThe strong man's strength should be applied to protect the weak, not
for personal aggression. Similarly, sex life, according to religious
principles (dharma), should be for the propagation of children, not
otherwise. The responsibility of parents is then to make theiroffspring Krsna conscious.
TEXT 12
ye caiva sattvika bhava
rajasas tamasas ca yematta eveti tan viddhina tv aham tesu te mayi
SYNONYMSye--all those; ca--and; eva--certainly; sattvikah--in goodness; bhavah-
-states of being; rajasah--mode of passion; tamasah--mode of ignorance;ca--also; ye--although; mattah--from Me; eva--certainly; iti--thus;tan--those; viddhi--try to know; na--not; tu--but; aham--I; tesu--inthose; te--they; mayi--unto Me.
TRANSLATIONAll states of being--be they of goodness, passion or ignorance--are
manifested by My energy. I am, in one sense, everything--but I amindependent. I am not under the modes of this material nature.
PURPORTAll material activities in the world are being conducted under the
three modes of material nature. Although these material modes of natureare emanations from the Supreme Lord, Krsna, He is not subject to them.For instance, under the state laws one may be punished, but the king,the lawmaker, is not subject to that law. Similarly, all the modes ofmaterial nature--goodness, passion and ignorance--are emanations fromthe Supreme Lord Krsna, but Krsna is not subject to material nature.Therefore He is nirguna, which means that these gunas, or modes,although issuing from Him, do not affect Him. That is one of thespecial characteristics of Bhagavan, or the Supreme Personality ofGodhead.
TEXT 13
tribhir guna-mayair bhavair
ebhih sarvam idam jagatmohitam nabhijanatimam ebhyah param avyayam
SYNONYMStribhih--three; guna-mayaih--by the three gunas; bhavaih--state of
being; ebhih--all these; sarvam--the whole world; idam--in this world;jagat--universe; mohitam--deluded; na abhijanati--do not know; mam--Me;ebhyah--above these; param--the Supreme; avyayam--inexhaustible.
TRANSLATIONDeluded by the three modes [goodness, passion and ignorance], the whole
world does not know Me, who am above the modes and inexhaustible.
PURPORT
The whole world is enchanted by three modes of material nature. Those
who are bewildered by these three modes cannot understand thattranscendental to this material nature is the Supreme Lord, Krsna. Inthis material world everyone is under the influence of these threegunas and is thus bewildered.By nature living entities have particular types of body and particulartypes of psychic and biological activities accordingly. There are fourclasses of men functioning in the three modes of nature. Those who arepurely in the mode of goodness are called brahmanas. Those who arepurely in the mode of passion are called ksatriyas. Those who are inthe modes of both passion and ignorance are called vaisyas. Those whoare completely in ignorance are called sudras. And those who are lessthan that are animals or animal life. However, these designations arenot permanent. I may either be a brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya orwhatever--in any case, this life is temporary. But although life istemporary and we do not know what we are going to be in the next life,still, by the spell of this illusory energy, we consider ourselves inthe light of this bodily conception of life, and we thus think that weare American, Indian, Russian or brahmana, Hindu, Muslim, etc. And ifwe become entangled with the modes of material nature, then we forgetthe Supreme Personality of Godhead who is behind all these modes. SoLord Krsna says that men, deluded by these three modes of nature, donot understand that behind the background is the Supreme Godhead.There are many different kinds of living entities--human beings,demigods, animals, etc.--and each and every one of them is under theinfluence of material nature, and all of them have forgotten thetranscendent Personality of Godhead. Those who are in the modes ofpassion and ignorance, and even those who are in the mode of goodness,cannot go beyond the impersonal Brahman conception of the AbsoluteTruth. They are bewildered before the Supreme Lord in His personalfeature, which possesses all beauty, opulence, knowledge, strength,fame and renunciation. When even those who are in goodness cannotunderstand, what hope is there for those in passion and ignorance?Krsna consciousness is transcendental to all these three modes ofmaterial nature, and those who are truly established in Krsnaconsciousness are actually liberated.
TEXT 14
daivi hy esa guna-mayi
mama maya duratyayamam eva ye prapadyantemayam etam taranti te
SYNONYMSdaivi--transcendental; hi--certainly; esa--this; guna-mayi--consisting
of the three modes of material nature; mama--My; maya--energy;duratyaya--very difficult to overcome; mam--unto Me; eva--certainly;ye--those; prapadyante--surrender; mayam etam--this illusory energy;taranti--overcome; te--they.
TRANSLATION
This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material
nature, is difficult to overcome. But those who have surrendered untoMe can easily cross beyond it.
PURPORTThe Supreme Personality of Godhead has innumerable energies, and all
these energies are divine. Although the living entities are part of Hisenergies and are therefore divine, due to contact with material energy,their original superior power is covered. Being thus covered bymaterial energy, one cannot possibly overcome its influence. Aspreviously stated, both the material and spiritual natures, beingemanations from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, are eternal. Theliving entities belong to the eternal superior nature of the Lord, butdue to contamination by the inferior nature, matter, their illusion isalso eternal. The conditioned soul is therefore called nitya-baddha, oreternally conditioned. No one can trace out the history of his becomingconditioned at a certain date in material history. Consequently, hisrelease from the clutches of material nature is very difficult, eventhough that material nature is an inferior energy, because materialenergy is ultimately conducted by the supreme will, which the livingentity cannot overcome. Inferior material nature is defined herein asdivine nature due to its divine connection and movement by the divinewill. Being conducted by divine will, material nature, althoughinferior, acts so wonderfully in the construction and destruction ofthe cosmic manifestation. The Vedas confirm this as follows: mayam tuprakrtim vidyan mayinam tu mahesvaram. "Although maya [illusion] isfalse or temporary, the background of maya is the supreme magician, thePersonality of Godhead, who is Mahesvara, the supreme controller."(Svetasvatara Upanisad 4.10)Another meaning of guna is rope; it is to be understood that theconditioned soul is tightly tied by the ropes of illusion. A man boundby the hands and feet cannot free himself--he must be helped by aperson who is unbound. Because the bound cannot help the bound, therescuer must be liberated. Therefore, only Lord Krsna, or His bona fiderepresentative the spiritual master, can release the conditioned soul.Without such superior help, one cannot be freed from the bondage ofmaterial nature. Devotional service, or Krsna consciousness, can helpone gain such release. Krsna, being the Lord of illusory energy, canorder this insurmountable energy to release the conditioned soul. Heorders this release out of His causeless mercy on the surrendered souland out of His paternal affection for the living entity, who isoriginally a beloved son of the Lord. Therefore surrender unto thelotus feet of the Lord is the only means to get free from the clutchesof the stringent material nature.The words mam eva are also significant. Mam means unto Krsna (Visnu)only, and not Brahma or Siva. Although Brahma and Siva are greatlyelevated and are almost on the level of Visnu, it is not possible forsuch incarnations of rajo-guna (passion) and tamo-guna (ignorance) torelease the conditioned soul from the clutches of maya. In other words,both Brahma and Siva are also under the influence of maya. Only Visnuis the master of maya; therefore He alone can give release to theconditioned soul. The Vedas (Svetasvatara Upanisad 3.8) confirm this inthe phrase tam eva viditva. or "Freedom is possible only byunderstanding Krsna." Even Lord Siva affirms that liberation can beachieved only by the mercy of Visnu. Lord Siva says, mukti-pradatasarvesam visnur eva na samsayah: "There is no doubt that Visnu is thedeliverer of liberation for everyone."
TEXT 15
na mam duskrtino mudhah
prapadyante naradhamahmayayapahrta-jnanaasuram bhavam asritah
SYNONYMSna--not; mam--unto Me; duskrtinah--miscreants; mudhah--foolish;
prapadyante--surrender; nara-adhamah--lowest among mankind; mayaya--bythe illusory energy; apahrta--stolen by illusion; jnanah--knowledge;asuram--demonic; bhavam--nature; asritah--accepting.
TRANSLATIONThose miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among mankind, whose
knowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheisticnature of demons, do not surrender unto Me.
PURPORTIt is said in Bhagavad-gita that simply by surrendering oneself unto
the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality Krsna, one can surmount thestringent laws of material nature. At this point a question arises: Howis it that educated philosophers, scientists, businessmen,administrators and all the leaders of ordinary men do not surrender tothe lotus feet of Sri Krsna, the all-powerful Personality of Godhead?Mukti, or liberation from the laws of material nature, is sought by theleaders of mankind in different ways and with great plans andperseverance for a great many years and births. But if that liberationis possible by simply surrendering unto the lotus feet of the SupremePersonality of Godhead, then why don't these intelligent and hard-working leaders adopt this simple method?The Gita answers this question very frankly. Those really learnedleaders of society like Brahma, Siva, Kapila, the Kumaras, Manu, Vyasa,Devala, Asita, Janaka, Prahlada, Bali, and later on Madhvacarya,Ramanujacarya, Sri Caitanya and many others--who are faithfulphilosophers, politicians, educators, scientists, etc.--surrender tothe lotus feet of the Supreme Person, the all-powerful authority. Thosewho are not actually philosophers, scientists, educators,administrators, etc., but who pose themselves as such for materialgain, do not accept the plan or path of the Supreme Lord. They have noidea of God; they simply manufacture their own worldly plans andconsequently complicate the problems of material existence in theirvain attempts to solve them. Because material energy (nature) is sopowerful, it can resist the unauthorized plans of the atheists andbaffle the knowledge of "planning commissions."The atheistic plan-makers are described herein by the word duskrtinah,or "miscreants." Krtina means one who has performed meritorious work.The atheist planmaker is sometimes very intelligent and meritoriousalso, because any gigantic plan, good or bad, must take intelligence toexecute. But because the atheist's brain is improperly utilized inopposing the plan of the Supreme Lord, the atheistic planmaker iscalled duskrtina, which indicates that his intelligence and efforts aremisdirected.
In the Gita it is clearly mentioned that material energy works fully
under the direction of the Supreme Lord. It has no independentauthority. It works as the shadow moves, in accordance with themovements of the object. But still material energy is very powerful,and the atheist, due to his godless temperament, cannot know how itworks; nor can he know the plan of the Supreme Lord. Under illusion andthe modes of passion and ignorance, all his plans are baffled, as inthe case of Hiranyakasipu and Ravana, whose plans were smashed to dustalthough they were both materially learned as scientists, philosophers,administrators and educators. These duskrtinas, or miscreants, are offour different patterns, as outlined below.(1) The mudhas are those who are grossly foolish, like hard-workingbeasts of burden. They want to enjoy the fruits of their labor bythemselves, and so do not want to part with them for the Supreme. Thetypical example of the beast of burden is the ass. This humble beast ismade to work very hard by his master. The ass does not really know forwhom he works so hard day and night. He remains satisfied by fillinghis stomach with a bundle of grass, sleeping for a while under fear ofbeing beaten by his master, and satisfying his sex appetite at the riskof being repeatedly kicked by the opposite party. The ass sings poetryand philosophy sometimes, but this braying only disturbs others. Thisis the position of the foolish fruitive worker who does not know forwhom he should work. He does not know that karma (action) is meant foryajna (sacrifice).Most often, those who work very hard day and night to clear the burdenof self-created duties say that they have no time to hear of theimmortality of the living being. To such mudhas, material gains, whichare destructible, are life's all in all--despite the fact that themudhas enjoy only a very small fraction of the fruit of labor.Sometimes they spend sleepless days and nights for fruitive gain, andalthough they may have ulcers or indigestion, they are satisfied withpractically no food; they are simply absorbed in working hard day andnight for the benefit of illusory masters. Ignorant of their realmaster, the foolish workers waste their valuable time serving mammon.Unfortunately, they never surrender to the supreme master of allmasters, nor do they take time to hear of Him from the proper sources.The swine who eat the stool do not care to accept sweetmeats made ofsugar and ghee. Similarly, the foolish worker will untiringly continueto hear of the sense-enjoyable tidings of the flickering mundane forcethat moves the material world.(2) Another class of duskrti, or miscreant, is called the naradhama, orthe lowest of mankind. Nara means human being, and adhama means thelowest. Out of the 8,400,000 different species of living beings, thereare 400,000 human species. Out of these there are numerous lower formsof human life that are mostly uncivilized. The civilized human beingsare those who have regulative principles of social, political andreligious life. Those who are socially and politically developed, butwho have no religious principles, must be considered naradhamas. Nor isreligion without God religion, because the purpose of followingreligious principles is to know the Supreme Truth and man's relationwith Him. In the Gita the Personality of Godhead clearly states thatthere is no authority above Him and that He is the Supreme Truth. Thecivilized form of human life is meant for man's reviving the lostconsciousness of his eternal relation with the Supreme Truth, thePersonality of Godhead Sri Krsna, who is all-powerful. Whoever losesthis chance is classified as a naradhama. We get information fromrevealed scriptures that when the baby is in the mother's womb (anextremely uncomfortable situation) he prays to God for deliverance and
promises to worship Him alone as soon as he gets out. To pray to God
when he is in difficulty is a natural instinct in every living beingbecause he is eternally related with God. But after his deliverance,the child forgets the difficulties of birth and forgets his delivereralso, being influenced by maya, the illusory energy.It is the duty of the guardians of children to revive the divineconsciousness dormant in them. The ten processes of reformatoryceremonies, as enjoined in the Manu-smrti, which is the guide toreligious principles, are meant for reviving God consciousness in thesystem of varnasrama. However, no process is strictly followed now inany part of the world, and therefore 99.9 percent of the population isnaradhama.When the whole population becomes naradhama, naturally all their so-called education is made null and void by the all-powerful energy ofphysical nature. According to the standard of the Gita, a learned manis he who sees on equal terms the learned brahmana, the dog, the cow,the elephant and the dog-eater. That is the vision of a true devotee.Sri Nityananda Prabhu, who is the incarnation of Godhead as divinemaster, delivered the typical naradhamas, the brothers Jagai andMadhai, and showed how the mercy of a real devotee is bestowed upon thelowest of mankind. So the naradhama who is condemned by the Personalityof Godhead can again revive his spiritual consciousness only by themercy of a devotee.Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, in propagating the bhagavata-dharma oractivities of the devotees, has recommended that people submissivelyhear the message of the Personality of Godhead. The essence of thismessage is Bhagavad-gita. The lowest amongst human beings can bedelivered by this submissive hearing process only, but unfortunatelythey even deny giving an aural reception to these messages, and what tospeak of surrendering to the will of the Supreme Lord? Naradhamas, orthe lowest of mankind, will fully neglect the prime duty of the humanbeing.(3) The next class of duskrti is called mayayapahrta-jnanah, or thosepersons whose erudite knowledge has been nullified by the influence ofillusory material energy. They are mostly very learned fellows--greatphilosophers, poets, literati, scientists, etc.--but the illusoryenergy misguides them, and therefore they disobey the Supreme Lord.There are a great number of mayayapahrta-jnanah at the present moment,even amongst the scholars of the Gita. In the Gita, in plain and simplelanguage, it is stated that Sri Krsna is the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. There is none equal to or greater than Him. He is mentioned asthe father of Brahma, the original father of all human beings. In fact,Sri Krsna is said to be not only the father of Brahma but also thefather of all species of life. He is the root of the impersonal Brahmanand Paramatma; the Supersoul in every entity is His plenary portion. Heis the fountainhead of everything and everyone is advised to surrenderunto His lotus feet. Despite all these clear statements, themayayapahrta-jnanah deride the personality of the Supreme Lord andconsider Him merely another human being. They do not know that theblessed form of human life is designed after the eternal andtranscendental feature of the Supreme Lord.All the unauthorized interpretations of the Gita by the class ofmayayapahrta-jnanah, outside the purview of the parampara system, areso many stumbling blocks on the path of spiritual understanding. Thedeluded interpreters do not surrender unto the lotus feet of Sri Krsna,nor do they teach others to follow this principle.(4) The last class of duskrti is called asuram bhavam asritah, or thoseof demonic principles. This class is openly atheistic. Some of them
argue that the Supreme Lord can never descend upon this material world,
but they are unable to give any tangible reasons as to why not. Thereare others who make Him subordinate to the impersonal feature, althoughthe opposite is declared in the Gita. Envious of the SupremePersonality of Godhead, the atheist will present a number of illicitincarnations manufactured in the factory of his brain. Such personswhose very principle of life is to decry the Personality of Godheadcannot surrender unto the lotus feet of Sri Krsna.Sri Yamunacarya Albandaru of South India said, "O my Lord! You areunknowable to persons involved with atheistic principles, despite Youruncommon qualities, features, and activities and despite Yourpersonality being confirmed by all the revealed scriptures in thequality of goodness, and despite Your being acknowledged by the famousauthorities renowned for their depth of knowledge in the transcendentalscience and situated in the godly qualities."Therefore, (1) grossly foolish persons, (2) the lowest of mankind, (3)the deluded speculators, and (4) the professed atheists, as abovementioned, never surrender unto the lotus feet of the Personality ofGodhead in spite of all scriptural and authoritative advice.
TEXT 16
catur-vidha bhajante mam
janah sukrtino 'rjunaarto jijnasur artharthijnani ca bharatarsabha
SYNONYMScatuh-vidhah--four kinds of; bhajante--render services; mam--unto Me;
janah--persons; su-krtinah--those who are pious; arjuna--O Arjuna;artah--the distressed; jijnasuh--the inquisitive; artha-arthi--one whodesires material gain; jnani--one who knows things as they are; ca--also; bharata-rsabha--O great one amongst the descendants of Bharata.
TRANSLATIONO best among the Bharatas [Arjuna], four kinds of pious men render
devotional service unto Me--the distressed, the desirer of wealth, theinquisitive, and he who is searching for knowledge of the Absolute.
PURPORTUnlike the miscreants, these are adherents of the regulative principles
of the scriptures, and they are called sukrtinah, or those who obey therules and regulations of scriptures, the moral and social laws, andare, more or less, devoted to the Supreme Lord. Out of these there arefour classes of men--those who are sometimes distressed, those who arein need of money, those who are sometimes inquisitive, and those whoare sometimes searching after knowledge of the Absolute Truth. Thesepersons come to the Supreme Lord for devotional service under differentconditions. These are not pure devotees because they have someaspiration to fulfill in exchange for devotional service. Puredevotional service is without aspiration and without desire formaterial profit. The Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.1.11) defines puredevotion thus:
anyabhilasita-sunyam
jnana-karmady-anavrtam
anukulyena krsnanu-silanam bhaktir uttama
"One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord
Krsna favorably and without desire for material profit or gain throughfruitive activities or philosophical speculation. That is called puredevotional service."When these four kinds of persons come to the Supreme Lord fordevotional service and are completely purified by the association of apure devotee, they also become pure devotees. As far as the miscreantsare concerned, for them devotional service is very difficult becausetheir lives are selfish, irregular and without spiritual goals. Buteven some of them, by chance, when they come in contact with a puredevotee, also become pure devotees.Those who are always busy with fruitive activities come to the Lord inmaterial distress and at that time associate with pure devotees andbecome, in their distress, devotees of the Lord. Those who are simplyfrustrated also come sometimes to associate with the pure devotees andbecome inquisitive to know about God. Similarly, when the dryphilosophers are frustrated in every field of knowledge, they sometimeswant to learn of God, and they come to the Supreme Lord to renderdevotional service and thus transcend knowledge of the impersonalBrahman and the localized Paramatma and come to the personal conceptionof Godhead by the grace of the Supreme Lord or His pure devotee. On thewhole, when the distressed, the inquisitive, the seekers of knowledge,and those who are in need of money are free from all material desires,and when they fully understand that material remuneration has nothingto do with spiritual improvement, they become pure devotees. As long assuch a purified stage is not attained, devotees in transcendentalservice to the Lord are tainted with fruitive activities, and theysearch after mundane knowledge, etc. So one has to transcend all thisbefore one can come to the stage of pure devotional service.
TEXT 17
tesam jnani nitya-yukta
eka-bhaktir visisyatepriyo hi jnanino 'tyarthamaham sa ca mama priyah
SYNONYMStesam--out of them; jnani--one in full knowledge; nitya-yuktah--always
engaged; eka--only one; bhaktih--in devotional service; visisyate--especially; priyah--very dear; hi--certainly; jnaninah--person inknowledge; atyartham--highly; aham--I am; sah--he; ca--also; mama--Mine; priyah--dear.
TRANSLATIONOf these, the wise one who is in full knowledge in union with Me
through pure devotional service is the best. For I am very dear to him,and he is dear to Me.
PURPORT
Free from all contaminations of material desires, the distressed, the
inquisitive, the penniless, and the seeker after supreme knowledge canall become pure devotees. But out of them, he who is in knowledge ofthe Absolute Truth and free from all material desires becomes a reallypure devotee of the Lord. And of the four orders, the devotee who is infull knowledge and is at the same time engaged in devotional serviceis, the Lord says, the best. By searching after knowledge one realizesthat his self is different from his material body, and when furtheradvanced he comes to the knowledge of impersonal Brahman and Paramatma.When one is fully purified, he realizes that his constitutionalposition is to be the eternal servant of God. So by association withpure devotees, the inquisitive, the distressed, the seeker aftermaterial amelioration and the man in knowledge all become themselvespure. But in the preparatory stage, the man who is in full knowledge ofthe Supreme Lord and is at the same time executing devotional serviceis very dear to the Lord. He who is situated in pure knowledge of thetranscendence of the Supreme Personality of God is so protected indevotional service that material contamination cannot touch him.
TEXT 18
udarah sarva evaite
jnani tv atmaiva me matamasthitah sa hi yuktatmamam evanuttamam gatim
SYNONYMSudarah--magnanimous; sarve--all; eva--certainly; ete--these; jnani--one
who is in knowledge; tu--but; atma eva--just like Myself; me--My;matam--opinion; asthitah--situated; sah--he; hi--certainly; yukta-atma--engaged in devotional service; mam--unto Me; eva--certainly;anuttamam--the highest goal; gatim--destination.
TRANSLATIONAll these devotees are undoubtedly magnanimous souls, but he who is
situated in knowledge of Me I consider verily to dwell in Me. Beingengaged in My transcendental service, he attains Me.
PURPORTIt is not that other devotees who are less complete in knowledge are
not dear to the Lord. The Lord says that all are magnanimous becauseanyone who comes to the Lord for any purpose is called a mahatma orgreat soul. The devotees who want some benefit out of devotionalservice are accepted by the Lord because there is an exchange ofaffection. Out of affection they ask the Lord for some materialbenefit, and when they get it they become so satisfied that they alsoadvance in devotional service. But the devotee in full knowledge isconsidered to be very dear to the Lord because his only purpose is toserve the Supreme Lord with love and devotion. Such a devotee cannotlive a second without contacting or serving the Supreme Lord.Similarly, the Supreme Lord is very fond of His devotee and cannot beseparated from him.In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (9.4.68), the Lord says:
sadhavo hrdayam mahyam
sadhunam hrdayam tv aham
mad-anyat te na janantinaham tebhyo manag api
"The devotees are always in My heart, and I am always in the hearts of
the devotees. The devotee does not know anything beyond Me, and I alsocannot forget the devotee. There is a very intimate relationshipbetween Me and the pure devotees. Pure devotees in full knowledge arenever out of spiritual touch, and therefore they are very much dear toMe."
TEXT 19
bahunam janmanam ante
jnanavan mam prapadyatevasudevah sarvam itisa mahatma su-durlabhah
SYNONYMSbahunam--many; janmanam--births; ante--after; jnana-van--he possessing
knowledge; mam--unto Me; prapadyate--surrenders; vasudevah--cause ofall causes; sarvam--all; iti--thus; sah--such; maha-atma--great soul;su-durlabhah--very rare.
TRANSLATIONAfter many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge
surrenders unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and allthat is. Such a great soul is very rare.
PURPORTThe living entity, while executing devotional service or transcendental
rituals after many, many births, may actually become situated intranscendental pure knowledge that the Supreme Personality of Godheadis the ultimate goal of spiritual realization. In the beginning ofspiritual realization, while one is trying to give up one's attachmentto materialism, there is some leaning towards impersonalism, but whenone is further advanced he can understand that there are activities inthe spiritual life and that these activities constitute devotionalservice. Realizing this, he becomes attached to the Supreme Personalityof Godhead and surrenders to Him. At such a time one can understandthat Lord Sri Krsna's mercy is everything, that He is the cause of allcauses and that this material manifestation is not independent fromHim. He realizes the material world to be a perverted reflection ofspiritual variegatedness and realizes that in everything there is arelationship with the Supreme Lord Krsna. Thus he thinks of everythingin relation to Vasudeva, or Sri Krsna. Such a universal vision ofVasudeva precipitates one's full surrender to the Supreme Lord SriKrsna as the highest goal. Such surrendered great souls are very rare.This verse is very nicely explained in the Third Chapter (verses 14 and15) of the Svetasvatara Upanisad: "In this body there are powers ofspeaking, of seeing, of hearing, of mental activities, etc. But theseare not important if not related to the Supreme Lord and becauseVasudeva is all-pervading and everything is Vasudeva, the devoteesurrenders in full knowledge (cf. Bhagavad-gita 7.17 and 11.40).
TEXT 20
kamais tais tair hrta-jnanah
prapadyante 'nya-devatahtam tam niyamam asthayaprakrtya niyatah svaya
SYNONYMSkamaih--by desires; taih--by those; taih--by those; hrta--distorted;
jnanah--knowledge; prapadyante--surrender; anya--other; devatah--demigods; tam--that; tam--that; niyamam--rules; asthaya--following;prakrtya--by nature; niyatah--controlled; svaya--by their own.
TRANSLATIONThose whose minds are distorted by material desires surrender unto
demigods and follow the particular rules and regulations of worshipaccording to their own natures.
PURPORTThose who are freed from all material contaminations surrender unto the
Supreme Lord and engage in His devotional service. As long as thematerial contamination is not completely washed off, they are by naturenondevotees. But even those who have material desires and who resort tothe Supreme Lord are not so much attracted by external nature; becauseof approaching the right goal, they soon become free from all materiallust. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is recommended that whether one isfree from all material desires, or is full of material desires, ordesires liberation from material contamination, or is a pure devoteeand has no desire for material sense gratification, he should in allcases surrender to Vasudeva and worship Him.It is said in the Bhagavatam that less intelligent people who have losttheir spiritual sense take shelter of demigods for immediatefulfillment of material desires. Generally, such people do not go tothe Supreme Personality of Godhead, because they are in particularmodes of nature (ignorance and passion) and therefore worship variousdemigods. Following the rules and regulations of worship, they aresatisfied. The worshipers of demigods are motivated by small desiresand do not know how to reach the supreme goal, but a devotee of theSupreme Lord is not misguided. Because in Vedic literature there arerecommendations for worshiping different gods for different purposes(e.g., a diseased man is recommended to worship the sun), those who arenot devotees of the Lord think that for certain purposes demigods arebetter than the Supreme Lord. But a pure devotee knows that the SupremeLord Krsna is the master of all. In the Caitanya-caritamrta (Adi 5.142)it is said, ekale isvara krsna, ara saba bhrtya: only the SupremePersonality of Godhead, Krsna, is master, and all others are servants.Therefore a pure devotee never goes to demigods for satisfaction of hismaterial needs. He depends on the Supreme Lord. And the pure devotee issatisfied with whatever He gives.
TEXT 21
yo yo yam yam tanum bhaktah
sraddhayarcitum icchatitasya tasyacalam sraddham
tam eva vidadhamy aham
SYNONYMSyah--that; yah--that; yam--which; yam--which; tanum--form of the
demigods; bhaktah--devotee; sraddhaya--with faith; arcitum--to worship;icchati--desires; tasya--of that; tasya--of that; acalam--steady;sraddham--faith; tam--him; eva--surely; vidadhami--give; aham--I.
TRANSLATIONI am in everyone's heart as the Supersoul. As soon as one desires to
worship the demigods, I make his faith steady so that he can devotehimself to some particular deity.
PURPORTGod has given independence to everyone; therefore, if a person desires
to have material enjoyment and wants very sincerely to have suchfacilities from the material demigods, the Supreme Lord, as Supersoulin everyone's heart, understands and gives facilities to such persons.As the supreme father of all living entities, He does not interferewith their independence, but gives all facilities so that they canfulfill their material desires. Some may ask why the all-powerful Godgives facilities to the living entities for enjoying this materialworld and so lets them fall into the trap of the illusory energy. Theanswer is that if the Supreme Lord as Supersoul does not give suchfacilities, then there is no meaning to independence. Therefore Hegives everyone full independence--whatever one likes--but His ultimateinstruction we find in the Bhagavad-gita: man should give up all otherengagements and fully surrender unto Him. That will make man happy.Both the living entity and the demigods are subordinate to the will ofthe Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore the living entity cannotworship the demigod by his own desire, nor can the demigod bestow anybenediction without the supreme will. As it is said, not a blade ofgrass moves without the will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.Generally, persons who are distressed in the material world go to thedemigods, as they are advised in the Vedic literature. A person wantingsome particular thing may worship such and such a demigod. For example,a diseased person is recommended to worship the sun-god; a personwanting education may worship the goddess of learning, Sarasvati; and aperson wanting a beautiful wife may worship the goddess Uma, the wifeof Lord Siva. In this way there are recommendations in the sastras(Vedic scriptures) for different modes of worship of differentdemigods. And because a particular living entity wants to enjoy aparticular material facility, the Lord inspires him with a strongdesire to achieve that benediction from that particular demigod, and sohe successfully receives the benediction. The particular mode of thedevotional attitude of the living entity toward a particular type ofdemigod is also arranged by the Supreme Lord. The demigods cannotinfuse the living entities with such an affinity, but because He is theSupreme Lord or the Supersoul who is present in the hearts of allliving entities, Krsna gives impetus to man to worship certaindemigods. The demigods are actually different parts of the universalbody of the Supreme Lord; therefore they have no independence. In theVedic literature it is stated: "The Supreme Personality of Godhead asSupersoul is also present within the heart of the demigod; therefore Hearranges through the demigod to fulfill the desire of the living
entity. But both the demigod and the living entity are dependent on the
supreme will. They are not independent."
TEXT 22
sa taya sraddhaya yuktas
tasyaradhanam ihatelabhate ca tatah kamanmayaiva vihitan hi tan
SYNONYMSsah--he; taya--with that; sraddhaya--with faith; yuktah--endowed;
tasya--his; aradhanam--worship; ihate--seeks; labhate--obtains; ca--and; tatah--from which; kaman--desires; maya--by Me; eva--alone;vihitan--regulated; hi--for; tan--those.
TRANSLATIONEndowed with such a faith, he seeks favors of a particular demigod and
obtains his desires. But in actuality these benefits are bestowed by Mealone.
PURPORTThe demigods cannot award benedictions to the devotees without the
permission of the Supreme Lord. The living entity may forget thateverything is the property of the Supreme Lord, but the demigods do notforget. So the worship of demigods and achievement of desired resultsare due not to the demigods but to the Supreme Personality of Godhead,by arrangement. The less intelligent living entity does not know this,and therefore he foolishly goes to the demigods for some benefit. Butthe pure devotee, when in need of something, prays only to the SupremeLord. Asking for material benefit, however, is not a sign of a puredevotee. A living entity goes to the demigods usually because he is madto fulfill his lust. This happens when something undue is desired bythe living entity and the Lord Himself does not fulfill the desire. Inthe Caitanya-caritamrta it is said that one who worships the SupremeLord and at the same time desires material enjoyment is contradictoryin his desires. Devotional service of the Supreme Lord and the worshipof a demigod cannot be on the same platform because worship of ademigod is material and devotional service to the Supreme Lord iscompletely spiritual.For the living entity who desires to return to Godhead, materialdesires are impediments. A pure devotee of the Lord is therefore notawarded the material benefits desired by less intelligent livingentities who prefer to worship demigods of the material world ratherthan engage in devotional service of the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 23
antavat tu phalam tesam
tad bhavaty alpa-medhasamdevan deva-yajo yantimad-bhakta yanti mam api
SYNONYMS
anta-vat tu--limited and temporary; phalam--fruits; tesam--their; tat--
that; bhavati--becomes; alpa-medhasam--of those of small intelligence;devan--demigods' planets; deva-yajah--worshipers of demigods; yanti--achieve; mat--My; bhaktah--devotees; yanti--attain; mam--to Me; api--surely.
TRANSLATIONMen of small intelligence worship the demigods, and their fruits are
limited and temporary. Those who worship the demigods go to the planetsof the demigods, but My devotees ultimately reach My supreme planet.
PURPORTSome commentators on the Gita say that one who worships a demigod can
reach the Supreme Lord, but here it is clearly stated that theworshipers of demigods go to the different planetary systems wherevarious demigods are situated, just as a worshiper of the sun achievesthe sun or a worshiper of the demigod of the moon achieves the moon.Similarly, if anyone wants to worship a demigod like Indra, he canattain that particular god's planet. It is not that everyone,regardless of whatever demigod is worshiped, will reach the SupremePersonality of Godhead. That is denied here, for it is clearly statedthat the worshipers of the demigods go to different planets in thematerial world, but the devotee of the Supreme Lord goes directly tothe supreme planet of the Personality of Godhead.Here the point may be raised that if the demigods are different partsof the body of the Supreme Lord, then the same end should be achievedby worshiping them. However, worshipers of the demigods are lessintelligent because they don't know to what part of the body food mustbe supplied. Some of them are so foolish that they claim that there aremany parts and many ways to supply food. This isn't very sanguine. Cananyone supply food to the body through the ears or eyes? They do notknow that these demigods are different parts of the universal body ofthe Supreme Lord, and in their ignorance they believe that each andevery demigod is a separate God and a competitor of the Supreme Lord.Not only are demigods parts of the Supreme Lord, but ordinary livingentities are also. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is stated that thebrahmanas are the head of the Supreme Lord, the ksatriyas are the arms,etc., and that all serve different functions. Regardless of thesituation, if one knows that both the demigods and himself are part andparcel of the Supreme Lord, his knowledge is perfect. But if he doesnot understand this, he achieves different planets where the demigodsreside. This is not the same destination the devotee reaches.The results achieved by the demigods' benedictions are perishablebecause within this material world the planets, the demigods and theirworshipers are all perishable. Therefore it is clearly stated in thisverse that all results achieved by worshiping demigods are perishable,and therefore such worship is performed by the less intelligent livingentity. Because the pure devotee engaged in Krsna consciousness indevotional service of the Supreme Lord achieves eternal blissfulexistence that is full of knowledge, his achievements and those of thecommon worshiper of the demigods are different. The Supreme Lord isunlimited; His favor is unlimited; His mercy is unlimited. Thereforethe mercy of the Supreme Lord upon His pure devotees is unlimited.
TEXT 24
avyaktam vyaktim apannam
manyante mam abuddhayahparam bhavam ajanantomamavyayam anuttamam
SYNONYMSavyaktam--nonmanifested; vyaktim--personality; apannam--achieved;
manyante--think; mam--unto Me; abuddhayah--less intelligent persons;param--supreme; bhavam--state of being; ajanantah--without knowing;mama--My; avyayam--imperishable; anuttamam--the finest.
TRANSLATIONUnintelligent men, who know Me not, think that I have assumed this form
and personality. Due to their small knowledge, they do not know Myhigher nature, which is changeless and supreme.
PURPORTThose who are worshipers of demigods have been described as less
intelligent persons, and here the impersonalists are similarlydescribed. Lord Krsna in His personal form is here speaking beforeArjuna, and still, due to ignorance, impersonalists argue that theSupreme Lord ultimately has no form. Yamunacarya, a great devotee ofthe Lord in the disciplic succession from Ramanujacarya, has writtentwo very appropriate verses in this connection. He says,"My dear Lord, devotees like Vyasadeva and Narada know You to be thePersonality of Godhead. By understanding different Vedic literatures,one can come to know Your characteristics, Your form and Youractivities, and one can thus understand that You are the SupremePersonality of Godhead. But those who are in the modes of passion andignorance, the demons, the nondevotees, cannot understand You. They areunable to understand You. However expert such nondevotees may be indiscussing Vedanta and the Upanisads and other Vedic literatures, it isnot possible for them to understand the Personality of Godhead."(Stotra-ratna 12)In the Brahma-samhita it is stated that the Personality of Godheadcannot be understood simply by study of the Vedanta literature. Only bythe mercy of the Supreme Lord can the Personality of the Supreme beknown. Therefore in this verse it is clearly stated that not only arethe worshipers of the demigods less intelligent, but those nondevoteeswho are engaged in Vedanta and speculation on Vedic literature withoutany tinge of true Krsna consciousness are also less intelligent, andfor them it is not possible to understand God's personal nature.Persons who are under the impression that the Absolute Truth isimpersonal are described as abuddhayah, which means one who does notknow the ultimate feature of the Absolute Truth. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is stated that supreme realization begins from theimpersonal Brahman and then rises to the localized Supersoul--but theultimate word in the Absolute Truth is the Personality of Godhead.Modern impersonalists are still less intelligent, for they do not evenfollow their great predecessor, Sankaracarya, who has specificallystated that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.Impersonalists, therefore, not knowing the Supreme Truth, think Krsnato be only the son of Devaki and Vasudeva, or a prince, or a powerfulliving entity. This is also condemned in the Bhagavad-gita (9.11).
Avajananti mam mudha manusim tanum asritam: "Only the fools regard Me
as an ordinary person."The fact is that no one can understand Krsna without renderingdevotional service and without developing Krsna consciousness. The Gitaconfirms this.One cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, or Hisform, quality or name simply by mental speculation or by discussingVedic literature. One must understand Him by devotional service. Whenone is fully engaged in Krsna consciousness, beginning by chanting themaha-mantra--Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama,Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare--then only can one understand theSupreme Personality of Godhead. Nondevotee impersonalists think thatKrsna has a body made of this material nature and that all Hisactivities, His form and everything, are maya. These impersonalists areknown as Mayavadis. They do not know the ultimate truth.The twentieth verse clearly states, kamais tais tair hrta-jnanahprapadyante 'nya-devatah. "Those who are blinded by lusty desiressurrender unto the different demigods." It is accepted that besides theSupreme Personality of Godhead, there are demigods who have theirdifferent planets, and the Lord also has a planet. As stated in thetwenty-third verse, devan deva-yajo yanti mad-bhakta yanti mam api: theworshipers of the demigods go to the different planets of the demigods,and those who are devotees of Lord Krsna go to the Krsnaloka planet.Although this is clearly stated, the foolish impersonalists stillmaintain that the Lord is formless and that these forms areimpositions. From the study of the Gita does it appear that thedemigods and their abodes are impersonal? Clearly, neither the demigodsnor Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, are impersonal. They areall persons; Lord Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and Hehas His own planet, and the demigods have theirs.Therefore the monistic contention that ultimate truth is formless andthat form is imposed does not hold true. It is clearly stated here thatit is not imposed. From the Gita we can clearly understand that theforms of the demigods and the form of the Supreme Lord aresimultaneously existing and that Lord Krsna is sac-cid-ananda, eternalblissful knowledge. The Vedas also confirm that the Supreme AbsoluteTruth is ananda-mayo, or by nature full of blissful pleasure, and thatHe is abhyasat, by nature the reservoir of unlimited auspiciousqualities. And in the Gita the Lord says that although He is aja(unborn), He still appears. These are the facts that we shouldunderstand from the Bhagavad-gita. We cannot understand how the SupremePersonality of Godhead can be impersonal; the imposition theory of theimpersonalist monist is false as far as the statements of the Gita areconcerned. It is clear herein that the Supreme Absolute Truth, LordKrsna, has both form and personality.
TEXT 25
naham prakasah sarvasya
yoga-maya-samavrtahmudho 'yam nabhijanatiloko mam ajam avyayam
SYNONYMSna--nor; aham--I; prakasah--manifest; sarvasya--to everyone; yoga-maya-
-internal potency; samavrtah--covered; mudhah--foolish; ayam--this; na-
-not; abhijanati--can understand; lokah--such less intelligent persons;
mam--Me; ajam--unborn; avyayam--inexhaustible.
TRANSLATIONI am never manifest to the foolish and unintelligent. For them I am
covered by My eternal creative potency [yoga-maya]; and so the deludedworld knows Me not, who am unborn and infallible.
PURPORTIt may be argued that since Krsna was present on this earth and was
visible to everyone, then why isn't He manifest to everyone now? Butactually He was not manifest to everyone. When Krsna was present therewere only a few people who could understand Him to be the SupremePersonality of Godhead. In the assembly of Kurus, when Sisupala spokeagainst Krsna being elected president of the assembly, Bhisma supportedHim and proclaimed Him to be the Supreme God. Similarly, the Pandavasand a few others knew that He was the Supreme, but not everyone. He wasnot revealed to the nondevotees and the common man. Therefore in theGita Krsna says that but for His pure devotees, all men consider Him tobe like themselves. He was manifest only to His devotees as thereservoir of all pleasure. But to others, to unintelligent nondevotees,He was covered by His internal potency.In the prayers of Kunti in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.8.19) it is saidthat the Lord is covered by the curtain of yoga-maya and thus ordinarypeople cannot understand Him. This yoga-maya curtain is also confirmedin the Isopanisad (mantra 15), in which the devotee prays:"O my Lord, You are the maintainer of the entire universe, anddevotional service to You is the highest religious principle.Therefore, I pray that You will also maintain me. Your transcendentalform is covered by the yoga-maya. The brahmajyoti is the covering ofthe internal potency. May You kindly remove this glowing effulgencethat impedes my seeing Your sac-cid-ananda-vigraha, Your eternal formof bliss and knowledge."This yoga-maya curtain is also mentioned in the Fifteenth Chapter ofthe Gita. The Supreme Personality of Godhead in His transcendental formof bliss and knowledge is covered by the internal potency of thebrahmajyoti, and the less intelligent impersonalists cannot see theSupreme on this account. Also in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.14.7) thereis this prayer by Brahma: "O Supreme Personality of Godhead, OSupersoul, O master of all mystery, who can calculate Your potency andpastimes in this world? You are always expanding Your internal potency,and therefore no one can understand You. Learned scientists and learnedscholars can examine the atomic constitution of the material world oreven the planets, but still they are unable to calculate Your energyand potency, although You are present before them." The SupremePersonality of Godhead, Lord Krsna, is not only unborn but also avyaya,inexhaustible. His eternal form is bliss and knowledge, and Hisenergies are all inexhaustible.
TEXT 26
vedaham samatitani
vartamanani carjunabhavisyani ca bhutanimam tu veda na kascana
SYNONYMS
veda--know; aham--I; sama--equally; a titani--past; vartamanani--
present; ca--and; arjuna--O Arjuna; bhavisyani--future; ca--also;bhutani--living entities; mam--Me; tu--but; veda--knows; na--not;kascana--anyone.
TRANSLATIONO Arjuna, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, I know everything that
has happened in the past, all that is happening in the present, and allthings that are yet to come. I also know all living entities; but Me noone knows.
PURPORTHere the question of personality and impersonality is clearly stated.
If Krsna, the form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is consideredby the impersonalists to be maya, to be material, then He would, likethe living entity, change His body and forget everything in His pastlife. Anyone with a material body cannot remember his past life, norcan he foretell his future life, nor can he predict the outcome of hispresent life; therefore he cannot know what is happening in past,present and future. Unless one is liberated from materialcontamination, he cannot know past, present and future.Unlike the ordinary human being, Lord Krsna clearly says that Hecompletely knows what happened in the past, what is happening in thepresent, and what will happen in the future. In the Fourth Chapter wehave seen that Lord Krsna remembers instructing Vivasvan, the sun-god,millions of years ago. Krsna knows every living entity because He issituated in every living being's heart as the Supreme Soul. But despiteHis presence in every living entity as Supersoul and His presencebeyond the material sky, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, theless intelligent cannot realize Him as the Supreme Person. Certainlythe transcendental body of Sri Krsna is not perishable. He is just likethe sun, and maya is like the cloud. In the material world we can seethat there is the sun and that there are clouds and different stars andplanets. The clouds may cover all these in the sky temporarily, butthis covering is only apparent to our limited vision. The sun, moon andstars are not actually covered. Similarly, maya cannot cover theSupreme Lord. By His internal potency He is not manifest to the lessintelligent class of men. As it is stated in the third verse of thischapter, out of millions and millions of men, some try to becomeperfect in this human form of life, and out of thousands and thousandsof such perfected men, hardly one can understand what Lord Krsna is.Even if one is perfected by realization of impersonal Brahman orlocalized Paramatma, he cannot possibly understand the SupremePersonality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, without being in Krsnaconsciousness.
TEXT 27
iccha-dvesa-samutthena
dvandva-mohena bharatasarva-bhutani sammohamsarge yanti parantapa
SYNONYMS
iccha--desire; dvesa--hate; samutthena--born; dvandva--duality; mohena-
-overcome; bharata--O scion of Bharata; sarva--all; bhutani--livingentities; sammoham--into delusion; sarge--in creation; yanti--go;parantapa--O conqueror of enemies.
TRANSLATIONO scion of Bharata [Arjuna], O conqueror of the foe, all living
entities are born into delusion, overcome by the dualities of desireand hate.
PURPORTThe real constitutional position of the living entity is that of
subordination to the Supreme Lord, who is pure knowledge. When one isdeluded into separation from this pure knowledge, he becomes controlledby illusory energy and cannot understand the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. The illusory energy is manifested in the duality of desire andhate. Due to desire and hate, the ignorant person wants to become onewith the Supreme Lord and envies Krsna as the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. Pure devotees, who are not so deluded or contaminated bydesire and hate, can understand that Lord Sri Krsna appears by Hisinternal potencies, but those who are deluded by duality and nesciencethink that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is created by materialenergies. This is their misfortune. Such deluded persons,symptomatically, dwell in dualities of dishonor and honor, misery andhappiness, woman and man, good and bad, pleasure and pain, etc.,thinking, "This is my wife; this is my house; I am the master of thishouse; I am the husband of this wife." These are the dualities ofdelusion. Those who are so deluded by dualities are completely foolishand therefore cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 28
yesam tv anta-gatam papam
jananam punya-karmanamte dvandva-moha-nirmuktabhajante mam drdha-vratah
SYNONYMSyesam--whose; tu--but; anta-gatam--completely eradicated; papam--sin;
jananam--of the persons; punya--pious; karmanam--previous activities;te--they; dvandva--duality; moha--delusion; nirmuktah--free from;bhajante--worship; mam--Me; drdha-vratah--with determination.
TRANSLATIONPersons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life,
whose sinful actions are completely eradicated and who are freed fromthe duality of delusion, engage themselves in My service withdetermination.
PURPORTThose eligible for elevation to the transcendental position are
mentioned in this verse. For those who are sinful, atheistic, foolish
and deceitful, it is very difficult to transcend the duality of desire
and hate. Only those who have passed their lives in practicing theregulative principles of religion, who have acted piously and who haveconquered sinful reactions can accept devotional service and graduallyrise to the pure knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Then,gradually, they can meditate in trance on the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. That is the process of being situated on the spiritualplatform. This elevation is possible in Krsna consciousness in theassociation of pure devotees who can deliver one from delusion.It is stated in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (5.5.2) that if one actuallywants to be liberated he must render service to the devotees (mahat-sevam dvaram ahur vimukteh); but one who associates with materialisticpeople is on the path leading to the darkest region of existence (tamo-dvaram yositam sangi-sangam). All the devotees of the Lord traversethis earth just to recover the conditioned souls from their delusion.The impersonalists do not know that forgetting their constitutionalposition as subordinate to the Supreme Lord is the greatest violationof God's law. Unless one is reinstated in his own constitutionalposition, it is not possible to understand the Supreme Personality orto be fully engaged in His transcendental loving service withdetermination.
TEXT 29
jara-marana-moksaya
mam asritya yatanti yete brahma tad viduh krtsnamadhyatmam karma cakhilam
SYNONYMSjara--old age; marana--death; moksaya--for the purpose of liberation;
mam--unto Me; asritya--taking shelter of; yatanti--endeavor; ye--allthose; te--such persons; brahma--Brahman; tat--actually that; viduh--they know; krtsnam--everything; adhyatmam--transcendental; karma--fruitive activities; ca--and; akhilam--entirely.
TRANSLATIONIntelligent persons who are endeavoring for liberation from old age and
death take refuge in Me in devotional service. They are actuallyBrahman because they entirely know everything about transcendental andfruitive activities.
PURPORTBirth, death, old age and diseases affect this material body, but not
the spiritual body. There is no birth, death, old age and disease forthe spiritual body, so one who attains a spiritual body, becomes one ofthe associates of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and engages ineternal devotional service, is really liberated. Aham brahmasmi: I amspirit. It is said that one should understand that he is Brahman--spirit soul. This Brahman conception of life is also in devotionalservice, as described in this verse. The pure devotees aretranscendentally situated on the Brahman platform, and they knoweverything about transcendental and material activities.
Four kinds of impure devotees who engage themselves in the
transcendental service of the Lord achieve their respective goals, andby the grace of the Supreme Lord, when they are fully Krsna conscious,they actually enjoy spiritual association with the Supreme Lord. Butthose who are worshipers of demigods never reach the Supreme Lord inHis supreme planet. Even the less intelligent Brahman-realized personscannot reach the supreme planet of Krsna known as Goloka Vrndavana.Only persons who perform activities in Krsna consciousness (mamasritya) are actually entitled to be called Brahman, because they areactually endeavoring to reach the Krsna planet. Such persons have nomisgivings about Krsna, and thus they are factually Brahman.Those who are engaged in worshiping the form or arca of the Lord, orwho are engaged in meditation on the Lord simply for liberation frommaterial bondage, also know, by the grace of the Lord, the purports ofBrahman, adhibhuta, etc., as explained by the Lord in the next chapter.
TEXT 30
sadhibhutadhidaivam mam
sadhiyajnam ca ye viduhprayana-kale 'pi ca mamte vidur yukta-cetasah
SYNONYMSsa-adhibhuta--the governing principle of the material manifestation;
adhidaivam--underlying all the demigods; mam--Me; sa-adhiyajnam--sustaining all sacrifices; ca--and; ye--those; viduh--know; prayana--ofdeath; kale--at the time; api--even; ca--and; mam--Me; te--they; viduh--know; yukta-cetasah--with steadfast minds.
TRANSLATIONThose who know Me as the Supreme Lord, as the governing principle of
the material manifestation, who know Me as the one underlying all thedemigods and as the one sustaining all sacrifices, can, with steadfastmind, understand and know Me, even at the time of death.
PURPORTPersons acting in Krsna consciousness are never entirely deviated from
the path of understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In thetranscendental association of Krsna consciousness, one can understandhow the Supreme Lord is the governing principle of the materialmanifestation and even of the demigods. Gradually, by suchtranscendental association, one becomes convinced of the SupremePersonality of Godhead Himself, and at the time of death such a Krsnaconscious person can never forget Krsna. Naturally he is thus promotedto the planet of the Supreme Lord, Goloka Vrndavana.This Seventh Chapter particularly explains how one can become a fullyKrsna conscious person. The beginning of Krsna consciousness isassociation of persons who are in Krsna consciousness. Such associationis spiritual and puts one directly in touch with the Supreme Lord, and,by His grace, one can understand Krsna to be the Supreme God. At thesame time one can really understand the constitutional position of theliving entity and how the living entity forgets Krsna and becomesentangled in material activities. By gradual development of Krsnaconsciousness in good association, the living entity can understand
