is engaged in devotional service he automatically comes to the stage of
sinlessness.While performing devotional service in the association of pure devoteesin full Krsna consciousness, there are certain things which require tobe vanquished altogether. The most important thing one has to surmountis weakness of the heart. The first falldown is caused by the desire tolord it over material nature. Thus one gives up the transcendentalloving service of the Supreme Lord. The second weakness of the heart isthat as one increases the propensity of lording it over materialnature, he becomes attached to matter and the possession of matter. Theproblems of material existence are due to these weaknesses of theheart.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Fifteenth Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Purusottama-yoga, the Yoga ofthe Supreme Person.
Chapter 16
The Divine And Demoniac Natures
TEXTS 1-3
sri-bhagavan uvaca
abhayam sattva-samsuddhirjnana-yoga-vyavasthitihdanam damas ca yajnas casvadhyayas tapa arjavam
ahimsa satyam akrodhas
tyagah santir apaisunamdaya bhutesv aloluptvammardavam hrir acapalam
tejah ksama dhrtih saucam
adroho nati-manitabhavanti sampadam daivimabhijatasya bharata
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; abhayam--
fearlessness; sattva-samsuddhih--purification of one's existence;jnana--knowledge; yoga--of linking up; vyavasthitih--the situation;danam--charity; damah ca--and controlling the mind; yajnah ca--andperformance of sacrifice; svadhyayah--study of Vedic literature; tapah--austerity; arjavam--simplicity; ahimsa--nonviolence; satyam--truthfulness; akrodhah--freedom from anger; tyagah--renunciation;santih--tranquillity; apaisunam--aversion to fault-finding; daya--mercy; bhutesu--towards all living entities; aloluptvam--freedom fromgreed; mardavam--gentleness; hrih--modesty; acapalam--determination;tejah--vigor; ksama--forgiveness; dhrtih--fortitude; saucam--cleanliness; adrohah--freedom from envy; na--not; ati-manita--expectation of honor; bhavanti--become; sampadam--qualities; daivim--transcendental; abhijatasya--of one who is born of; bharata--O son ofBharata.
TRANSLATION
The Blessed Lord said: Fearlessness, purification of one's existence,
cultivation of spiritual knowledge, charity, self-control, performanceof sacrifice, study of the Vedas, austerity and simplicity;nonviolence, truthfulness, freedom from anger; renunciation,tranquillity, aversion to faultfinding, compassion and freedom fromcovetousness; gentleness, modesty and steady determination; vigor,forgiveness, fortitude, cleanliness, freedom from envy and the passionfor honor--these transcendental qualities, O son of Bharata, belong togodly men endowed with divine nature.
PURPORTIn the beginning of the Fifteenth Chapter, the banyan tree of this
material world was explained. The extra roots coming out of it werecompared to the activities of the living entities, some auspicious,some inauspicious. In the Ninth Chapter, also, the devas, or godly, andthe asuras, the ungodly, or demons, were explained. Now, according toVedic rites, activities in the mode of goodness are consideredauspicious for progress on the path of liberation, and such activitiesare known as daivi prakrti, transcendental by nature. Those who aresituated in the transcendental nature make progress on the path ofliberation. For those who are acting in the modes of passion andignorance, on the other hand, there is no possibility of liberation.Either they will have to remain in this material world as human beings,or they will descend among the species of animals or even lower lifeforms. In this Sixteenth Chapter the Lord explains both thetranscendental nature and its attendant qualities and the demoniacnature and its qualities. He also explains the advantages anddisadvantages of these qualities.The word abhijatasya in reference to one born of transcendentalqualities or godly tendencies is very significant. To beget a child ina godly atmosphere is known in the Vedic scriptures as Garbhadhana-samskara. If the parents want a child in the godly qualities theyshould follow the ten principles of the human being. In Bhagavad-gitawe have studied also before that sex life for begetting a good child isKrsna Himself. Sex life is not condemned provided the process is usedin Krsna consciousness. Those who are in Krsna consciousness at leastshould not beget children like cats and dogs but should beget them sothat they may become Krsna conscious after birth. That should be theadvantage of children born of a father or mother absorbed in Krsnaconsciousness.The social institution known as varnasrama-dharma--the institutiondividing society into four divisions or castes--is not meant to dividehuman society according to birth. Such divisions are in terms ofeducational qualifications. They are to keep the society in a state ofpeace and prosperity. The qualities mentioned herein are explained astranscendental qualities meant for making a person progress inspiritual understanding so that he can get liberated from the materialworld. In the varnasrama institution the sannyasi, or the person in therenounced order of life, is considered to be the head or the spiritualmaster of all the social statuses and orders. A brahmana is consideredto be the spiritual master of the three other sections of a society,namely, the ksatriyas, the vaisyas and the sudras, but a sannyasi, whois on the top of the institution, is considered to be the spiritualmaster of the brahmanas also. For a sannyasi, the first qualificationshould be fearlessness. Because a sannyasi has to be alone without anysupport or guarantee of support, he has simply to depend on the mercyof the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If he thinks, "After I leave my
connections, who will protect me?" he should not accept the renounced
order of life. One must be fully convinced that Krsna or the SupremePersonality of Godhead in His localized aspect as Paramatma is alwayswithin, that He is seeing everything and that He always knows what oneintends to do. One must thus have firm conviction that Krsna asParamatma will take care of a soul surrendered to Him. "I shall neverbe alone," one should think. "Even if I live in the darkest regions ofa forest I shall be accompanied by Krsna, and He will give me allprotection." That conviction is called abhayam, without fear. Thisstate of mind is necessary for a person in the renounced order of life.Then he has to purify his existence. There are so many rules andregulations to be followed in the renounced order of life. Mostimportant of all, a sannyasi is strictly forbidden to have any intimaterelationship with a woman. He is even forbidden to talk with a woman ina secluded place. Lord Caitanya was an ideal sannyasi, and when He wasat Puri His feminine devotees could not even come near to offer theirrespects. They were advised to bow down from a distant place. This isnot a sign of hatred for women as a class, but it is a strictureimposed on the sannyasi not to have close connections with women. Onehas to follow the rules and regulations of a particular status of lifein order to purify his existence. For a sannyasi, intimate relationswith women and possession of wealth for sense gratification arestrictly forbidden. The ideal sannyasi was Lord Caitanya Himself, andwe can learn from His life that He was very strict in regards to women.Although He is considered to be the most liberal incarnation ofGodhead, accepting the most fallen conditioned souls, He strictlyfollowed the rules and regulations of the sannyasa order of life inconnection with association with woman. One of His personal associates,namely Chota Haridasa, was personally associated with Lord Caitanyaalong with His other confidential personal associates, but somehow orother this Chota Haridasa looked lustily on a young woman, and LordCaitanya was so strict that He at once rejected him from the society ofHis personal associates. Lord Caitanya said, "For a sannyasi or anyonewho is aspiring to get out of the clutches of material nature andtrying to elevate himself to the spiritual nature and go back home,back to Godhead, for him, looking toward material possessions and womenfor sense gratification--not even enjoying them, but just lookingtoward them with such a propensity--is so condemned that he had bettercommit suicide before experiencing such illicit desires." So these arethe processes for purification.The next item is jnana-yoga-vyavasthiti: being engaged in thecultivation of knowledge. Sannyasi life is meant for distributingknowledge to the householders and others who have forgotten their reallife of spiritual advancement. A sannyasi is supposed to beg from doorto door for his livelihood, but this does not mean that he is a beggar.Humility is also one of the qualifications of a transcendentallysituated person, and out of sheer humility the sannyasi goes from doorto door, not exactly for the purpose of begging, but to see thehouseholders and awaken them to Krsna consciousness. This is the dutyof a sannyasi. If he is actually advanced and so ordered by hisspiritual master, he should preach Krsna consciousness with logic andunderstanding, and if he is not so advanced he should not accept therenounced order of life. But even if he has accepted the renouncedorder of life without sufficient knowledge, he should engage himselffully in hearing from a bona fide spiritual master to cultivateknowledge. A sannyasi, or one in the renounced order of life, must besituated in fearlessness, sattva-samsuddhi (purity) and jnana-yoga(knowledge).
The next item is charity. Charity is meant for the householders. The
householders should earn a livelihood by an honorable means and spendfifty percent of their income to propagate Krsna consciousness all overthe world. Thus a householder should give in charity to suchinstitutional societies that are engaged in that way. Charity should begiven to the right receiver. There are different kinds of charities, aswill be explained later on, charity in the modes of goodness, passionand ignorance. Charity in the mode of goodness is recommended by thescriptures, but charity in the modes of passion and ignorance is notrecommended because it is simply a waste of money. Charity should begiven only to propagate Krsna consciousness all over the world. That ischarity in the mode of goodness.Then as far as dama (self-control) is concerned, it is not only meantfor other orders of religious society, but it is especially meant forthe householder. Although he has a wife, a householder should not usehis senses for sex life unnecessarily. There are restrictions for thehouseholders even in sex life, which should only be engaged in for thepropagation of children. If he does not require children, he should notenjoy sex life with his wife. Modern society enjoys sex life withcontraceptive methods or more abominable methods to avoid theresponsibility of children. This is not in the transcendental qualitybut is demoniac. If anyone, even if he is a householder, wants to makeprogress in spiritual life, he must control his sex life and should notbeget a child without the purpose of serving Krsna. If he is able tobeget children who will be in Krsna consciousness, one can producehundreds of children, but without this capacity one should not indulgeonly for sense pleasure.Sacrifice is another item to be performed by the householders becausesacrifices require a large amount of money. Other orders of life,namely brahmacarya, vanaprastha and sannyasa, have no money; they liveby begging. So performance of different types of sacrifice is meant forthe householder. They should perform agni-hotra sacrifices as enjoinedin the Vedic literature, but such sacrifices at the present moment arevery expensive, and it is not possible for any householder to performthem. The best sacrifice recommended in this age is called sankirtana-yajna, the chanting of Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. This is the best and mostinexpensive sacrifice; everyone can adopt it and derive benefit. Sothese three items, namely charity, sense control and performance ofsacrifice, are meant for the householder.Then svadhyaya, Vedic study, and tapas, austerity, and arjavam,gentleness or simplicity, are meant for brahmacarya or student life.Brahmacaris should have no connection with women; they should live alife of celibacy and engage the mind in the study of Vedic literaturefor cultivation of spiritual knowledge. This is called svadhyaya.Tapas or austerity, is especially meant for the retired life. One mustnot remain a householder throughout his whole life; he must alwaysremember that there are four divisions of life, brahmacarya, grhastha,vanaprastha and sannyasa. So after grhastha, householder life, oneshould retire. If one lives for a hundred years, he should spendtwenty-five years in student life, twenty-five in householder life,twenty-five in retired life and twenty-five in the renounced order oflife. These are the regulations of the Vedic religious discipline. Aman retired from household life must practice austerities of the body,mind and tongue. That is tapasya. The entire varnasrama-dharma societyis meant for tapasya. Without tapasya or austerity, no human being canget liberation. The theory that there is no need of austerity in life,that one can go on speculating and everything will be nice, is neither
recommended in the Vedic literature nor in Bhagavad-gita. Such theories
are manufactured by show-bottle spiritualists who are trying to gathermore followers. If there are restrictions, rules and regulations,people will not become attracted. Therefore those who want followers inthe name of religion, just to have a show only, don't restrict thelives of their students nor their own lives. But that method is notapproved by the Vedas.As far as simplicity is concerned, not only should a particular orderof life follow this principle, but every member, be he in thebrahmacari asrama, or grhastha asrama, or vanaprastha asrama orsannyasa asrama. One must live very simply.Ahimsa means not arresting the progressive life of any living entity.One should not think that since the spirit spark is never killed evenafter the killing of the body there is no harm in killing animals forsense gratification. People are now addicted to eating animals, inspite of having an ample supply of grains, fruits and milk. There is nonecessity for animal killing. This injunction is for everyone. Whenthere is no other alternative, one may kill an animal, but it should beoffered in sacrifice. At any rate, when there is an ample food supplyfor humanity, persons who are desiring to make advancement in spiritualrealization should not commit violence to animals. Real ahimsa meansnot checking anyone's progressive life. The animals are also makingprogress in their evolutionary life by transmigrating from one categoryof animal life to another. If a particular animal is killed, then hisprogress is checked. If an animal is staying in a particular body forso many days or so many years and is untimely killed, then he has tocome back again in that form of life to complete the remaining days inorder to be promoted to another species of life. So their progressshould not be checked simply to satisfy one's palate. This is calledahimsa.Satyam. This word means that one should not distort the truth for somepersonal interest. In Vedic literature there are some difficultpassages, but the meaning or the purpose should be learned from a bonafide spiritual master. That is the process for understanding the Vedas.Sruti means that one should hear from the authority. One should notconstrue some interpretation for his personal interest. There are somany commentaries on Bhagavad-gita that misinterpret the original text.The real import of the word should be presented, and that should belearned from a bona fide spiritual master.Akrodha means to check anger. Even if there is provocation one shouldbe tolerant, for once one becomes angry his whole body becomespolluted. Anger is a product of the modes of passion and lust, so onewho is transcendentally situated should check himself from anger.Apaisunam means that one should not find fault with others or correctthem unnecessarily. Of course to call a thief a thief is notfaultfinding, but to call an honest person a thief is very muchoffensive for one who is making advancement in spiritual life. Hrimeans that one should be very modest and must not perform some actwhich is abominable. Acapalam, determination, means that one should notbe agitated or frustrated in some attempt. There may be failure in someattempt, but one should not be sorry for that; he should make progresswith patience and determination.The word tejas used here is meant for the ksatriyas. The ksatriyasshould always be very strong to be able to give protection to the weak.They should not pose themselves as nonviolent. If violence is required,they must exhibit it.Saucam means cleanliness, not only in mind and body but in one'sdealings also. It is especially meant for the mercantile people, who
should not deal in the black market. Nati-manita, not expecting honor,
applies to the sudras, the worker class, who are considered, accordingto Vedic injunctions, to be the lowest of the four classes. They shouldnot be puffed up with unnecessary prestige or honor and should remainin their own status. It is the duty of the sudras to offer respect tothe higher classes for the upkeep of the social order.All these twenty-six qualifications mentioned are transcendentalqualities. They should be cultivated according to the differentstatuses of the social order. The purport is that even though materialconditions are miserable, if these qualities are developed by practice,by all classes of men, then gradually it is possible to rise to thehighest platform of transcendental realization.
TEXT 4
dambho darpo 'bhimanas ca
krodhah parusyam eva caajnanam cabhijatasyapartha sampadam asurim
SYNONYMSdambhah--pride; darpah--arrogance; abhimanah--conceit; ca--and;
krodhah--anger; parusyam--harshness; eva--certainly; ca--and; ajnanam--ignorance; ca--and; abhijatasya--one who is born of; partha--O son ofPrtha; sampadam--nature; asurim--demoniac.
TRANSLATIONArrogance, pride, anger, conceit, harshness and ignorance--these
qualities belong to those of demoniac nature, O son of Prtha.
PURPORTIn this verse, the royal road to hell is described. The demoniac want
to make a show of religion and advancement in spiritual science,although they do not follow the principles. They are always arrogantand proud in possessing some type of education or so much wealth. Theydesire to be worshiped by others, and demand respectability, althoughthey do not command respect. Over trifles they become very angry andspeak harshly, not gently. They do not know what should be done andwhat should not be done. They do everything whimsically, according totheir own desire, and they do not recognize any authority. Thesedemoniac qualities are taken on by them from the beginning of theirbodies in the wombs of their mothers, and as they grow they manifestall these inauspicious qualities.
TEXT 5
daivi sampad vimoksaya
nibandhayasuri matama sucah sampadam daivimabhijato 'si pandava
SYNONYMSdaivi--transcendental; sampat--nature; vimoksaya--meant for liberation;
nibandhaya--for bondage; asuri--demoniac qualities; mata--it is
considered; ma--do not; sucah--worry; sampadam--nature; daivim--
transcendental; abhijatah--born; asi--you are; pandava--O son of Pandu.
TRANSLATIONThe transcendental qualities are conducive to liberation, whereas the
demoniac qualities make for bondage. Do not worry, O son of Pandu, foryou are born with the divine qualities.
PURPORTLord Krsna encouraged Arjuna by telling him that he was not born with
demoniac qualities. His involvement in the fight was not demoniacbecause he was considering the pros and cons. He was consideringwhether respectable persons such as Bhisma and Drona should be killedor not, so he was not acting under the influence of anger, falseprestige, or harshness. Therefore he was not of the quality of thedemons. For a ksatriya, a military man, shooting arrows at the enemy isconsidered transcendental, and refraining from such a duty is demoniac.Therefore, there was no cause for Arjuna to lament. Anyone who performsthe regulative principles of the different orders of life istranscendentally situated.
TEXT 6
dvau bhuta-sargau loke 'smin
daiva asura eva cadaivo vistarasah proktaasuram partha me srnu
SYNONYMSdvau--two; bhuta-sargau--created living beings; loke--in the world;
asmin--this; daivah--godly; asurah--demoniac; eva--certainly; ca--and;daivah--divine; vistarasah--at great length; proktah--said; asuram--demoniac; partha--O son of Prtha; me--from Me; srnu--just hear.
TRANSLATIONO son of Prtha, in this world there are two kinds of created beings.
One is called the divine and the other demoniac. I have alreadyexplained to you at length the divine qualities. Now hear from Me ofthe demoniac.
PURPORTLord Krsna, having assured Arjuna that he was born with the divine
qualities, is now describing the demoniac way. The conditioned livingentities are divided into two classes in this world. Those who are bornwith divine qualities follow a regulated life; that is to say theyabide by the injunctions in scriptures and by the authorities. Oneshould perform duties in the light of authoritative scripture. Thismentality is called divine. One who does not follow the regulativeprinciples as they are laid down in the scriptures and who actsaccording to his whims is called demoniac or asuric. There is no othercriterion but obedience to the regulative principles of scriptures. Itis mentioned in Vedic literature that both the demigods and the demons
are born of the Prajapati; the only difference is that one class obeys
the Vedic injunctions and the other does not.
TEXT 7
pravrttim ca nivrttim ca
jana na vidur asurahna saucam napi cacarona satyam tesu vidyate
SYNONYMSpravrttim--proper action; ca--also; nivrttim--improper action; ca--and;
janah--persons; na--never; viduh--know; asurah--demoniac qualities; na--never; saucam--cleanliness; na--nor; api--also; ca--and; acarah--behavior; na--never; satyam--truth; tesu--in them; vidyate--there is.
TRANSLATIONThose who are demoniac do not know what is to be done and what is not
to be done. Neither cleanliness nor proper behavior nor truth is foundin them.
PURPORTIn every civilized human society there is some set of scriptural rules
and regulations which are followed from the beginning, especially amongthe Aryans, those who adopt the Vedic civilization and who are known asthe most advanced civilized people. Those who do not follow thescriptural injunctions are supposed to be demons. Therefore it isstated here that the demons do not know the scriptural rules, nor dothey have any inclination to follow them. Most of them do not knowthem, and even if some of them know, they do not have the tendency tofollow them. They have no faith, nor are they willing to act in termsof the Vedic injunctions. The demons are not clean, either externallyor internally. One should always be careful to keep his body clean bybathing, brushing teeth, shaving, changing clothes, etc. As far asinternal cleanliness is concerned, one should always remember the holynames of God and chant Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. The demons neither like norfollow all these rules for external and internal cleanliness.As for behavior, there are many rules and regulations guiding humanbehavior, such as the Manu-samhita, which is the law of the human race.Even up to today, those who are Hindu follow the Manu-samhita. Laws ofinheritance and other legalities are derived from this book. Now, inthe Manu-samhita, it is clearly stated that a woman should not be givenfreedom. That does not mean that women are to be kept as slaves, butthey are like children. Children are not given freedom, but that doesnot mean that they are kept as slaves. The demons have now neglectedsuch injunctions, and they think that women should be given as muchfreedom as men. However, this has not improved the social condition ofthe world. Actually, a woman should be given protection at every stageof life. She should be given protection by the father in her youngerdays, by the husband in her youth, and by the grown-up sons in her oldage. This is proper social behavior according to the Manu-samhita. Butmodern education has artificially devised a puffed-up concept ofwomanly life, and therefore marriage is practically now an imaginationin human society. Nor is the moral condition of women very good now.
The demons, therefore, do not accept any instruction which is good for
society, and because they do not follow the experience of great sagesand the rules and regulations laid down by the sages, the socialcondition of the demoniac people is very miserable.
TEXT 8
asatyam apratistham te
jagad ahur anisvaramaparaspara-sambhutamkim anyat kama-haitukam
SYNONYMSasatyam--unreal; apratistham--without foundation; te--they; jagat--the
cosmic manifestation; ahuh--is said; anisvaram--with no controller;aparaspara--by mutual lust; sambhutam--cause; kim anyat--there is noother cause; kama-haitukam--it is due to lust only.
TRANSLATIONThey say that this world is unreal, that there is no foundation and
that there is no God in control. It is produced of sex desire, and hasno cause other than lust.
PURPORTThe demonic conclude that the world is phantasmagoria. There is no
cause, no effect, no controller, no purpose: everything is unreal. Theysay that this cosmic manifestation arises due to chance materialactions and reactions. They do not think that the world was created byGod for a certain purpose. They have their own theory: that the worldhas come about in its own way and that there is no reason to believethat there is a God behind it. For them there is no difference betweenspirit and matter, and they do not accept the Supreme Spirit.Everything is matter only, and the whole cosmos is supposed to be amass of ignorance. According to them, everything is void, and whatevermanifestation exists is due to our ignorance in perception. They takeit for granted that all manifestation of diversity is a display ofignorance. Just as in a dream we may create so many things whichactually have no existence, so when we are awake we shall see thateverything is simply a dream. But factually, although the demons saythat life is a dream, they are very expert in enjoying this dream. Andso, instead of acquiring knowledge, they become more and moreimplicated in their dreamland. They conclude that as a child is simplythe result of sexual intercourse between man and woman, this world isborn without any soul. For them it is only a combination of matter thathas produced the living entities, and there is no question of theexistence of the soul. As many living creatures come out fromperspiration and from a dead body without any cause, similarly, thewhole living world has come out of the material combinations of thecosmic manifestation. Therefore material nature is the cause of thismanifestation, and there is no other cause. They do not believe in thewords of Krsna in Bhagavad-gita: mayadhyaksena prakrtih suyate sa-caracaram. "Under My direction the whole material world is moving." Inother words, amongst the demons there is no perfect knowledge of thecreation of the world; every one of them has some particular theory ofhis own. According to them, one interpretation of the scriptures is as
good as another, for they do not believe in a standard understanding of
the scriptural injunctions.
TEXT 9
etam drstim avastabhya
nastatmano 'lpa-buddhayahprabhavanty ugra-karmanahksayaya jagato 'hitah
SYNONYMSetam--thus; drstim--vision; avastabhya--accepting; nasta--lost;
atmanah--self; alpa-buddhayah--less intelligent; prabhavanti--flourish;ugra-karmanah--in painful activities; ksayaya--for destruction;jagatah--of the world; ahitah--unbeneficial.
TRANSLATIONFollowing such conclusions, the demoniac, who are lost to themselves
and who have no intelligence, engage in unbeneficial, horrible worksmeant to destroy the world.
PURPORTThe demoniac are engaged in activities that will lead the world to
destruction. The Lord states here that they are less intelligent. Thematerialists, who have no concept of God, think that they areadvancing. But, according to Bhagavad-gita, they are unintelligent anddevoid of all sense. They try to enjoy this material world to theutmost limit and therefore always engage in inventing something forsense gratification. Such materialistic inventions are considered to beadvancement of human civilization, but the result is that people growmore and more violent and more and more cruel, cruel to animals andcruel to other human beings. They have no idea how to behave toward oneanother. Animal killing is very prominent amongst demoniac people. Suchpeople are considered the enemies of the world because ultimately theywill invent or create something which will bring destruction to all.Indirectly, this verse anticipates the invention of nuclear weapons, ofwhich the whole world today is very proud. At any moment war may takeplace, and these atomic weapons may create havoc. Such things arecreated solely for the destruction of the world, and this is indicatedhere. Due to godlessness, such weapons are invented in human society;they are not meant for the peace and prosperity of the world.
TEXT 10
kamam asritya duspuram
dambha-mana-madanvitahmohad grhitvasad-grahanpravartante 'suci-vratah
SYNONYMSkamam--lust; asritya--taking shelter of; duspuram--insatiable; dambha--
pride; mana--false prestige; mada-anvitah--absorbed in conceit; mohat--by illusion; grhitva--taking; asat--nonpermanent; grahan--things;pravartante--flourish; asuci--unclean; vratah--avowed.
TRANSLATION
The demoniac, taking shelter of insatiable lust, pride and false
prestige, and being thus illusioned, are always sworn to unclean work,attracted by the impermanent.
PURPORTThe demoniac mentality is described here. The demons lust is never
satiated. They will go on increasing and increasing their insatiabledesires for material enjoyment. Although they are always full ofanxieties on account of accepting nonpermanent things, they stillcontinue to engage in such activities out of illusion. They have noknowledge and cannot tell that they are heading the wrong way.Accepting nonpermanent things, such demoniac people create their ownGod, create their own hymns and chant accordingly. The result is thatthey become more and more attracted to two things--sex enjoyment andaccumulation of material wealth. The word asuci-vratah, "unclean vows,"is very significant in this connection. Such demoniac people are onlyattracted by wine, women, gambling and meat-eating; those are theirasuci, unclean habits. Induced by pride and false prestige, they createsome principles of religion which are not approved by the Vedicinjunctions. Although such demoniac people are most abominable in theworld, still, by artificial means the world creates a false honor forthem. Although they are gliding toward hell, they consider themselvesvery much advanced.
TEXTS 11-12
cintam aparimeyam ca
pralayantam upasritahkamopabhoga-paramaetavad iti niscitah
asa-pasa-satair baddhah
kama-krodha-parayanahihante kama-bhogarthamanyayenartha-sancayan
SYNONYMScintam--fears and anxieties; aparimeyam--unmeasurable; ca--and;
pralaya-antam--unto the point of death; upasritah--having taken shelterof them; kama-upabhoga--sense gratification; paramah--the highest goalof life; etavat--thus; iti--in this way; niscitah--ascertained; asa-pasa--entanglements in the network of hope; sataih--by hundreds;baddhah--being bound; kama--lust; krodha--anger; parayanah--alwayssituated in that mentality; ihante--desire; kama--lust; bhoga--senseenjoyment; artham--for that purpose; anyayena--illegally; artha--wealth; sancayan--accumulate.
TRANSLATIONThey believe that to gratify the senses unto the end of life is the
prime necessity of human civilization. Thus there is no end to theiranxiety. Bound by hundreds and thousands of desires, by lust and anger,they secure money by illegal means for sense gratification.
PURPORT
The demoniac accept that the enjoyment of the senses is the ultimate
goal of life, and this concept they maintain until death. They do notbelieve in life after death, and they do not believe that one takes ondifferent types of bodies according to one's karma, or activities inthis world. Their plans for life are never finished, and they go onpreparing plan after plan, all of which are never finished. We havepersonal experience of a person of such demoniac mentality, who, evenat the point of death, was requesting the physician to prolong his lifefor four years more because his plans were not yet complete. Suchfoolish people do not know that a physician cannot prolong life evenfor a moment. When the notice is there, there is no consideration ofthe man's desire. The laws of nature do not allow a second beyond whatone is destined to enjoy.The demoniac person, who has no faith in God or the Supersoul withinhimself, performs all kinds of sinful activities simply for sensegratification. He does not know that there is a witness sitting withinhis heart. The Supersoul is observing the activities of the individualsoul. As it is stated in the Upanisads, there are two birds sitting inone tree; one is acting and enjoying or suffering the fruits of thebranches, and the other is witnessing. But one who is demoniac has noknowledge of Vedic scripture, nor has he any faith; therefore he feelsfree to do anything for sense enjoyment, regardless of theconsequences.
TEXTS 13-15
idam adya maya labdham
imam prapsye manorathamidam astidam api mebhavisyati punar dhanam
asau maya hatah satrur
hanisye caparan apiisvaro 'ham aham bhogisiddho 'ham balavan sukhi
adhyo 'bhijanavan asmi
ko 'nyo 'sti sadrso mayayaksye dasyami modisyaity ajnana-vimohitah
SYNONYMSidam--this; adya--today; maya--by me; labdham--gained; imam--this;
prapsye--I shall gain; manah-ratham--according to my desires; idam--this; asti--there is; idam--this; api--also; me--mine; bhavisyati--willincrease in the future; punah--again; dhanam--wealth; asau--that; maya--by me; hatah--has been killed; satruh--enemy; hanisye--I shall kill;ca--also; aparan--others; api--certainly; isvarah--the lord; aham--Iam; aham--I am; bhogi--the enjoyer; siddhah--perfect; aham--I am; bala-van--powerful; sukhi--happy; adhyah--wealthy; abhijana-van--surroundedby aristocratic relatives; asmi--I am; kah--who else; anyah--other;asti--there is; sadrsah--like; maya--me; yaksye--I shall sacrifice;dasyami--I shall give charity; modisye--I shall rejoice; iti--thus;ajnana--by ignorance; vimohitah--deluded by.
TRANSLATION
The demoniac person thinks: "So much wealth do I have today, and I will
gain more according to my schemes. So much is mine now, and it willincrease in the future, more and more. He is my enemy, and I havekilled him; and my other enemies will also be killed. I am the lord ofeverything. I am the enjoyer. I am perfect, powerful and happy. I amthe richest man, surrounded by aristocratic relatives. There is none sopowerful and happy as I am. I shall perform sacrifices, I shall givesome charity, and thus I shall rejoice." In this way, such persons aredeluded by ignorance.
TEXT 16
aneka-citta-vibhranta
moha-jala-samavrtahprasaktah kama-bhogesupatanti narake 'sucau
SYNONYMSaneka--numerous; citta vibhrantah--perplexed by anxieties; moha--of
illusions; jala--by a network; samavrtah--surrounded; prasaktah--attached; kama--lust; bhogesu--sense gratification; patanti--glidesdown; narake--into hell; asucau--unclean.
TRANSLATIONThus perplexed by various anxieties and bound by a network of
illusions, one becomes too strongly attached to sense enjoyment andfalls down into hell.
PURPORTThe demoniac man knows no limit to his desire to acquire money. That is
unlimited. He only thinks how much assessment he has just now andschemes to engage that stock of wealth further and further. For thatreason, he does not hesitate to act in any sinful way and so deals inthe black market for illegal gratification. He is enamored by thepossessions he has already, such as land, family, house and bankbalance, and he is always planning to improve them. He believes in hisown strength, and he does not know that whatever he is gaining is dueto his past good deeds. He is given an opportunity to accumulate suchthings, but he has no conception of past causes. He simply thinks thatall his mass of wealth is due to his own endeavor. A demoniac personbelieves in the strength of his personal work, not in the law of karma.According to the law of karma, a man takes his birth in a high family,or becomes rich, or very well educated, or very beautiful because ofgood work in the past. The demoniac think that all these things areaccidental and due to the strength of his personal ability. He does notsense any arrangement behind all the varieties of people, beauty andeducation. Anyone who comes into competition with such a demoniac manis his enemy. There are many demoniac people, and each is enemy to theothers. This enmity becomes more and more deep--between persons, thenbetween families, then between societies, and at last between nations.Therefore there is constant strife, war and enmity all over the world.
Each demoniac person thinks that he can live at the sacrifice of all
others. Generally, a demoniac person thinks of himself as the SupremeGod, and a demoniac preacher tells his followers: "Why are you seekingGod elsewhere? You are all yourselves God! Whatever you like, you cando. Don't believe in God. Throw away God. God is dead." These are thedemoniac's preachings.Although the demoniac person sees others equally rich and influential,or even more so, he thinks that no one is richer than he and that noone is more influential than he. As far as promotion to the higherplanetary system is concerned, he does not believe in performing yajnasor sacrifices. Demons think that they will manufacture their ownprocess of yajna and prepare some machine, by which they will be ableto reach any higher planet. The best example of such a demoniac man wasRavana. He offered a program to the people by which he would prepare astaircase so that anyone could reach the heavenly planets withoutperforming sacrifices, such as are prescribed in the Vedas. Similarly,in the present age such demoniac men are striving to reach the higherplanetary systems by mechanical arrangements. These are examples ofbewilderment. The result is that, without their knowledge, they aregliding toward hell. Here the Sanskrit word moha-jala is verysignificant. Jala means net; like fish caught in a net, they have noway to come out.
TEXT 17
atma-sambhavitah stabdha
dhana-mana-madanvitahyajante nama-yajnais tedambhenavidhi-purvakam
SYNONYMSatma-sambhavitah--self-complacent; stabdhah--impudent; dhana-mana--
wealth and false prestige; mada anvitah--absorbed in pride; yajante--perform sacrifices; nama--in name only; yajnaih--with such a sacrifice;te--they; dambhena--out of pride; avidhi-purvakam--without followingany rules and regulations.
TRANSLATIONSelf-complacent and always impudent, deluded by wealth and false
prestige, they sometimes perform sacrifices in name only, withoutfollowing any rules or regulations.
PURPORTThinking themselves all in all, not caring for any authority or
scripture, the demoniac sometimes perform so-called religious orsacrificial rites. And since they do not believe in authority, they arevery impudent. This is due to illusion caused by accumulating somewealth and false prestige. Sometimes such demons take up the role ofpreacher, mislead the people, and become known as religious reformersor as incarnations of God. They make a show of performing sacrifices,or they worship the demigods, or manufacture their own God. Common menadvertise them as God and worship them, and by the foolish they areconsidered advanced in the principles of religion, or in the principlesof spiritual knowledge. They take the dress of the renounced order oflife and engage in all nonsense in that dress. Actually there are so
many restrictions for one who has renounced this world. The demons,
however, do not care for such restrictions. They think that whateverpath one can create is one's own path; there is no such thing as astandard path one has to follow. The word avidhi-purvakam, meaning adisregard for the rules and regulations, is especially stressed here.These things are always due to ignorance and illusion.
TEXT 18
ahankaram balam darpam
kamam krodham ca samsritahmam atma-para-dehesupradvisanto 'bhyasuyakah
SYNONYMSahankaram--false ego; balam--strength; darpam--pride; kamam--lust;
krodham--anger; ca--also; samsritah--having taken shelter of; mam--Me;atma--one's own; para dehesu--in other bodies; pradvisantah--blasphemes; abhyasuyakah--envious.
TRANSLATIONBewildered by false ego, strength, pride, lust and anger, the demon
becomes envious of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is situatedin his own body and in the bodies of others, and blaspheme against thereal religion.
PURPORTA demoniac person, being always against God's supremacy, does not like
to believe in the scriptures. He is envious of both the scriptures andof the existence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is causedby his so-called prestige and his accumulation of wealth and strength.He does not know that the present life is a preparation for the nextlife. Not knowing this, he is actually envious of his own self, as wellas of others. He commits violence on other bodies and on his own. Hedoes not care for the supreme control of the Personality of Godheadbecause he has no knowledge. Being envious of the scriptures and theSupreme Personality of Godhead, he puts forward false arguments againstthe existence of God and refutes the scriptural authority. He thinkshimself independent and powerful in every action. He thinks that sinceno one can equal him in strength, power, or in wealth, he can act inany way and no one can stop him. If he has an enemy who might check theadvancement of his sensual activities, he makes plans to cut him downby his own power.
TEXT 19
tan aham dvisatah kruran
samsaresu naradhamanksipamy ajasram asubhanasurisv eva yonisu
SYNONYMStan--those; aham--I; dvisatah--envious; kruran--mischievous; samsaresu-
-into the ocean of material existence; nara-adhaman--the lowest of
mankind; ksipami--put; ajasram--innumerable; asubhan--inauspicious;
asurisu--demoniac; eva--certainly; yonisu--in the wombs.
TRANSLATIONThose who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among men,
are cast by Me into the ocean of material existence, into variousdemoniac species of life.
PURPORTIn this verse it is clearly indicated that the placing of a particular
individual soul in a particular body is the prerogative of the supremewill. The demoniac person may not agree to accept the supremacy of theLord, and it is a fact that he may act according to his own whims, buthis next birth will depend upon the decision of the Supreme Personalityof Godhead and not on himself. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam, Third Canto,it is stated that an individual soul, after his death, is put into thewomb of a mother where he gets a particular type of body under thesupervision of superior power. Therefore in the material existence wefind so many species of life--animals, insects, men, and so on. All arearranged by the superior power. They are not accidental. As for thedemoniac, it is clearly said here that they are perpetually put intothe wombs of demons, and thus they continue to be envious, the lowestof mankind. Such demoniac species of men are held to be always full oflust, always violent and hateful and always unclean. They are just likeso many beasts in a jungle.
TEXT 20
asurim yonim apanna
mudha janmani janmanimam aprapyaiva kaunteyatato yanty adhamam gatim
SYNONYMSasurim--demoniac; yonim--species; apannah--gaining; mudhah--the
foolish; janmani janmani--in birth after birth; mam--unto Me; aprapya--without achieving; eva--certainly; kaunteya--O son of Kunti; tatah--thereafter; yanti--goes; adhamam--condemned; gatim--destination.
TRANSLATIONAttaining repeated birth amongst the species of demoniac life, such
persons can never approach Me. Gradually they sink down to the mostabominable type of existence.
PURPORTIt is known that God is all-merciful, but here we find that God is
never merciful to the demoniac. It is clearly stated that the demoniacpeople, life after life, are put into the wombs of similar demons, and,not achieving the mercy of the Supreme Lord, they go down and down, sothat at last they achieve bodies like those of cats, dogs and hogs. Itis clearly stated that such demons have practically no chance ofreceiving the mercy of God at any stage of later life. In the Vedasalso it is stated that such persons gradually sink to become dogs and
hogs. It may be then argued in this connection that God should not be
advertised as all-merciful if He is not merciful to such demons. Inanswer to this question, in the Vedanta-sutra we find that the SupremeLord has no hatred for anyone. The placing of the asuras, the demons,in the lowest status of life is simply another feature of His mercy.Sometimes the asuras are killed by the Supreme Lord, but this killingis also good for them, for in Vedic literature we find that anyone whois killed by the Supreme Lord becomes liberated. There are instances inhistory of many asuras--Ravana, Kamsa, Hiranyakasipu--to whom the Lordappeared in various incarnations just to kill them. Therefore God'smercy is shown to the asuras if they are fortunate enough to be killedby Him.
TEXT 21
tri-vidham narakasyedam
dvaram nasanam atmanahkamah krodhas tatha lobhastasmad etat trayam tyajet
SYNONYMStri-vidham--three kinds of; narakasya--hellish; idam--this; dvaram--
gate; nasanam--destructive; atmanah--of the self; kamah--lust; krodhah--anger; tatha--as well as; lobhah--greed; tasmat--therefore; etat--these; trayam--three; tyajet--must give up.
TRANSLATIONThere are three gates leading to this hell--lust, anger and greed.
Every sane man should give these up, for they lead to the degradationof the soul.
PURPORTThe beginning of demoniac life is described herein. One tries to
satisfy his lust, and when he cannot, anger and greed arise. A sane manwho does not want to glide down to the species of demoniac life musttry to give up these three enemies which can kill the self to such anextent that there will be no possibility of liberation from thismaterial entanglement.
TEXT 22
etair vimuktah kaunteya
tamo-dvarais tribhir narahacaraty atmanah sreyastato yati param gatim
SYNONYMSetaih--by these; vimuktah--being liberated; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
tamah-dvaraih--the gates of ignorance; tribhih--three kinds of; narah--a person; acarati--performs; atmanah--self; sreyah--benediction; tatah--thereafter; yati--goes; param--supreme; gatim--destination.
TRANSLATION
The man who has escaped these three gates of hell, O son of Kunti,
performs acts conducive to self-realization and thus gradually attainsthe supreme destination.
PURPORTOne should be very careful of these three enemies to human life: lust,
anger and greed. The more a person is freed from lust, anger and greed,the more his existence becomes pure. Then he can follow the rules andregulations enjoined in the Vedic literature. By following theregulative principles of human life, one gradually raises himself tothe platform of spiritual realization. If one is so fortunate, by suchpractice, to rise to the platform of Krsna consciousness, then successis guaranteed for him. In the Vedic literature, the ways of action andreaction are prescribed to enable one to come to the stage ofpurification. The whole method is based on giving up lust, greed andanger. By cultivating knowledge of this process, one can be elevated tothe highest position of self-realization; this self-realization isperfected in devotional service. In that devotional service, theliberation of the conditioned soul is guaranteed. Therefore, accordingto the Vedic system, there are instituted the four orders of life andthe four statuses of life, called the caste system and the spiritualorder system. There are different rules and regulations for differentcastes or divisions of society, and if a person is able to follow them,he will be automatically raised to the highest platform of spiritualrealization. Then he can have liberation without a doubt.
TEXT 23
yah sastra-vidhim utsrjya
vartate kama-karatahna sa siddhim avapnotina sukham na param gatim
SYNONYMSyah--anyone; sastra-vidhim--the regulations of the scriptures; utsrjya-
-giving up; vartate--remains; kama-karatah--acting whimsically in lust;na--never; sah--he; siddhim--perfection; avapnoti--achieves; na--never;sukham--happiness; na--never; param--the supreme; gatim--perfectionalstage.
TRANSLATIONBut he who discards scriptural injunctions and acts according to his
own whims attains neither perfection, nor happiness, nor the supremedestination.
PURPORTAs described before, the sastra-vidhi, or the direction of the sastra,
is given to the different castes and orders of human society. Everyoneis expected to follow these rules and regulations. If one does notfollow them and acts whimsically according to his lust, greed anddesire, then he never will be perfect in his life. In other words, aman may theoretically know all these things, but if he does not applythem in his own life, then he is to be known as the lowest of mankind.In the human form of life, a living entity is expected to be sane and
to follow the regulations given for elevating his life to the highest
platform, but if he does not follow them, then he degrades himself. Buteven if he follows the rules and regulations and moral principles andultimately does not come to the stage of understanding the SupremeLord, then all his knowledge becomes spoiled. Therefore one shouldgradually raise himself to the platform of Krsna consciousness anddevotional service; it is then and there that he can attain the highestperfectional stage, not otherwise.The word kama-karatah is very significant. A person who knowinglyviolates the rules acts in lust. He knows that this is forbidden, stillhe acts. This is called acting whimsically. He knows that this shouldbe done, but still he does not do it; therefore he is called whimsical.Such persons are destined to be condemned by the Supreme Lord. Suchpersons cannot have the perfection which is meant for the human life.The human life is especially meant for purifying one's existence, andone who does not follow the rules and regulations cannot purifyhimself, nor can he attain the real stage of happiness.
TEXT 24
tasmac chastram pramanam te
karyakarya-vyavasthitaujnatva sastra-vidhanoktamkarma kartum iharhasi
SYNONYMStasmat--therefore; sastram--scriptures; pramanam--evidence; te--your;
karya--duty; akarya--forbidden activities; vyavasthitau--indetermining; jnatva--knowing; sastra--of scripture; vidhana--regulations; uktam--as declared; karma--work; kartum--to do; ihaarhasi--you should do it.
TRANSLATIONOne should understand what is duty and what is not duty by the
regulations of the scriptures. Knowing such rules and regulations, oneshould act so that he may gradually be elevated.
PURPORTAs stated in the Fifteenth Chapter, all the rules and regulations of
the Vedas are meant for knowing Krsna. If one understands Krsna fromthe Bhagavad-gita and becomes situated in Krsna consciousness, engaginghimself in devotional service, he has reached the highest perfection ofknowledge offered by the Vedic literature. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhumade this process very easy: He asked people simply to chant HareKrsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, RamaRama, Hare Hare and to engage in the devotional service of the Lord andeat the remnants of foodstuff offered to the Deity. One who is directlyengaged in all these devotional activities is to be understood ashaving studied all Vedic literature. He has come to the conclusionperfectly. Of course, for the ordinary persons who are not in Krsnaconsciousness or who are not engaged in devotional service, what is tobe done and what is not to be done must be decided by the injunctionsof the Vedas. One should act accordingly, without argument. That iscalled following the principles of sastra, or scripture. Sastra iswithout the four principal defects that are visible in the conditioned
