One who follows the path of the Gita as it is can very easily
understand these two important divisions of spiritual knowledge. Forhim there is no difficulty in obtaining perfect knowledge of the selfas part and parcel of the Lord. And such understanding is beneficialfor such a person who easily understands the transcendental activitiesof the Lord. In the beginning of this chapter, the transcendentalactivities of the Lord were discussed by the Supreme Lord Himself. Onewho does not understand the instructions of the Gita is faithless, andis to be considered to be misusing the fragmental independence awardedto him by the Lord. In spite of such instructions, one who does notunderstand the real nature of the Lord as the eternal, blissful, all-knowing Personality of Godhead, is certainly fool number one. Ignorancecan be removed by gradual acceptance of the principles of Krsnaconsciousness. Krsna consciousness is awakened by different types ofsacrifices to the demigods, sacrifice to Brahman, sacrifice incelibacy, in household life, in controlling the senses, in practicingmystic yoga, in penance, in forgoing material possessions, in studyingthe Vedas, and in partaking of the social institution calledvarnasrama-dharma. All of these are known as sacrifice, and all of themare based on regulated action. But within all these activities, theimportant factor is self-realization. One who seeks that objective isthe real student of Bhagavad-gita, but one who doubts the authority ofKrsna falls back. One is therefore advised to study Bhagavad-gita, orany other scripture, under a bona fide spiritual master, with serviceand surrender. A bona fide spiritual master is in the disciplicsuccession from time eternal, and he does not deviate at all from theinstructions of the Supreme Lord as they were imparted millions ofyears ago to the sun-god, from whom the instructions of Bhagavad-gitahave come down to the earthly kingdom. One should, therefore, followthe path of Bhagavad-gita as it is expressed in the Gita itself andbeware of self-interested people after personal aggrandizement whodeviate others from the actual path. The Lord is definitely the supremeperson, and His activities are transcendental. One who understands thisis a liberated person from the very beginning of his study of the Gita.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Fourth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Transcendental Knowledge.
Chapter 5
Karma-yoga--Action in Krsna Consciousness
TEXT 1
arjuna uvaca
sannyasam karmanam krsnapunar yogam ca samsasiyac chreya etayor ekamtan me bruhi su-niscitam
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; sannyasam--renunciation; karmanam--of all
activities; krsna--O Krsna; punah--again; yogam--devotional service;ca--also; samsasi--You are praising; yat--which; sreyah--is beneficial;etayoh--of these two; ekam--one; tat--that; me--unto me; bruhi--pleasetell; su-niscitam--definitely.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: O Krsna, first of all You ask me to renounce work, and
then again You recommend work with devotion. Now will You kindly tellme definitely which of the two is more beneficial?
PURPORTIn this Fifth Chapter of the Bhagavad-gita, the Lord says that work in
devotional service is better than dry mental speculation. Devotionalservice is easier than the latter because, being transcendental innature, it frees one from reaction. In the Second Chapter, preliminaryknowledge of the soul and its entanglement in the material body wereexplained. How to get out of this material encagement by buddhi-yoga,or devotional service, was also explained therein. In the ThirdChapter, it was explained that a person who is situated on the platformof knowledge no longer has any duties to perform. And, in the FourthChapter, the Lord told Arjuna that all kinds of sacrificial workculminate in knowledge. However, at the end of the Fourth Chapter, theLord advised Arjuna to wake up and fight, being situated in perfectknowledge. Therefore, by simultaneously stressing the importance ofboth work in devotion and inaction in knowledge, Krsna has perplexedArjuna and confused his determination. Arjuna understands thatrenunciation in knowledge involves cessation of all kinds of workperformed as sense activities. But if one performs work in devotionalservice, then how is work stopped? In other words, he thinks thatsannyasa, or renunciation in knowledge, should be altogether free fromall kinds of activity because work and renunciation appear to him to beincompatible. He appears not to have understood that work in fullknowledge is nonreactive and is therefore the same as inaction. Heinquires, therefore, whether he should cease work altogether, or workwith full knowledge.
TEXT 2
sri-bhagavan uvaca
sannyasah karma-yogas canihsreyasa-karav ubhautayos tu karma-sannyasatkarma-yogo visisyate
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Personality of Godhead said; sannyasah--
renunciation of work; karma-yogah--work in devotion; ca--also;nihsreyasa-karau--all leading to the path of liberation; ubhau--both;tayoh--of the two; tu--but; karma-sannyasat--in comparison to therenunciation of fruitive work; karma-yogah--work in devotion;visisyate--is better.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: The renunciation of work and work in devotion
are both good for liberation. But, of the two, work in devotionalservice is better than renunciation of works.
PURPORT
Fruitive activities (seeking sense gratification) are cause for
material bondage. As long as one is engaged in activities aimed atimproving the standard of bodily comfort, one is sure to transmigrateto different types of bodies, thereby continuing material bondageperpetually. Srimad-Bhagavatam (5.5.4-6) confirms this as follows:
nunam pramattah kurute vikarma
yad indriya-pritaya aprnotina sadhu manye yata atmano 'yamasann api klesa-da asa dehah
parabhavas tavad abodha-jato
yavan na jijnasata atma-tattvamyavat kriyas tavad idam mano vaikarmatmakam yena sarira-bandhah
evam manah karma-vasam prayunkte
avidyayatmany upadhiyamanepritir na yavan mayi vasudevena mucyate deha-yogena tavat
"People are mad after sense gratification, and they do not know that
this present body, which is full of miseries, is a result of one'sfruitive activities in the past. Although this body is temporary, it isalways giving one trouble in many ways. Therefore, to act for sensegratification is not good. One is considered to be a failure in life aslong as he makes no inquiry about his real identity. As long as he doesnot know his real identity, he has to work for fruitive results forsense gratification, and as long as one is engrossed in theconsciousness of sense gratification one has to transmigrate from onebody to another. Although the mind may be engrossed in fruitiveactivities and influenced by ignorance, one must develop a love fordevotional service to Vasudeva. Only then can one have the opportunityto get out of the bondage of material existence."Therefore, jnana (or knowledge that one is not this material body butspirit soul) is not sufficient for liberation. One has to act in thestatus of spirit soul, otherwise there is no escape from materialbondage. Action in Krsna consciousness is not, however, action on thefruitive platform. Activities performed in full knowledge strengthenone's advancement in real knowledge. Without Krsna consciousness, mererenunciation of fruitive activities does not actually purify the heartof a conditioned soul. As long as the heart is not purified, one has towork on the fruitive platform. But action in Krsna consciousnessautomatically helps one escape the result of fruitive action so thatone need not descend to the material platform. Therefore, action inKrsna consciousness is always superior to renunciation, which alwaysentails a risk of falling. Renunciation without Krsna consciousness isincomplete, as is confirmed by Srila Rupa Gosvami in his Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.2.258):
prapancikataya buddhya
hari-sambandhi-vastunahmumuksubhih parityagovairagyam phalgu kathyate
"Renunciation by persons eager to achieve liberation of things which
are related to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, though they arematerial, is called incomplete renunciation." Renunciation is complete
when it is in the knowledge that everything in existence belongs to the
Lord and that no one should claim proprietorship over anything. Oneshould understand that, factually, nothing belongs to anyone. Thenwhere is the question of renunciation? One who knows that everything isKrsna's property is always situated in renunciation. Since everythingbelongs to Krsna, everything should be employed in the service ofKrsna. This perfect form of action in Krsna consciousness is far betterthan any amount of artificial renunciation by a sannyasi of theMayavadi school.
TEXT 3
jneyah sa nitya-sannyasi
yo na dvesti na kanksatinirdvandvo hi maha-bahosukham bandhat pramucyate
SYNONYMSjneyah--should be known; sah--he; nitya--always; sannyasi--renouncer;
yah--who; na--never; dvesti--abhors; na--nor; kanksati--desires;nirdvandvah--free from all dualities; hi--certainly; maha-baho--Omighty-armed one; sukham--happily; bandhat--from bondage; pramucyate--is completely liberated.
TRANSLATIONOne who neither hates nor desires the fruits of his activities is known
to be always renounced. Such a person, free from all dualities, easilyovercomes material bondage and is completely liberated, O mighty-armedArjuna.
PURPORTOne who is fully in Krsna consciousness is always a renouncer because
he feels neither hatred nor desire for the results of his actions. Sucha renouncer, dedicated to the transcendental loving service of theLord, is fully qualified in knowledge because he knows hisconstitutional position in his relationship with Krsna. He knows fullywell that Krsna is the whole and that he is part and parcel of Krsna.Such knowledge is perfect because it is qualitatively andquantitatively correct. The concept of oneness with Krsna is incorrectbecause the part cannot be equal to the whole. Knowledge that one isone in quality yet different in quantity is correct transcendentalknowledge leading one to become full in himself, having nothing toaspire to or lament over. There is no duality in his mind becausewhatever he does, he does for Krsna. Being thus freed from the platformof dualities, he is liberated--even in this material world.
TEXT 4
sankhya-yogau prthag balah
pravadanti na panditahekam apy asthitah samyagubhayor vindate phalam
SYNONYMS
sankhya--analytical study of the material world; yogau--work in
devotional service; prthak--different; balah--the less intelligent;pravadanti--say; na--never; panditah--the learned; ekam--in one; api--even; asthitah--being situated; samyak--complete; ubhayoh--of both;vindate--enjoys; phalam--the result.
TRANSLATIONOnly the ignorant speak of devotional service [karma-yoga] as being
different from the analytical study of the material world [Sankhya].Those who are actually learned say that he who applies himself well toone of these paths achieves the results of both.
PURPORTThe aim of the analytical study of the material world is to find the
soul of existence. The soul of the material world is Visnu, or theSupersoul. Devotional service to the Lord entails service to theSupersoul. One process is to find the root of the tree, and the otheris to water the root. The real student of Sankhya philosophy finds theroot of the material world, Visnu, and then, in perfect knowledge,engages himself in the service of the Lord. Therefore, in essence,there is no difference between the two because the aim of both isVisnu. Those who do not know the ultimate end say that the purposes ofSankhya and karma-yoga are not the same, but one who is learned knowsthe unifying aim in these different processes.
TEXT 5
yat sankhyaih prapyate sthanam
tad yogair api gamyateekam sankhyam ca yogam cayah pasyati sa pasyati
SYNONYMSyat--what; sankhyaih--by means of Sankhya philosophy; prapyate--is
achieved; sthanam--place; tat--that; yogaih--by devotional service;api--also; gamyate--one can attain; ekam--one; sankhyam--analyticalstudy; ca--and; yogam--action in devotion; ca--and; yah--one who;pasyati--sees; sah--he; pasyati--actually sees.
TRANSLATIONOne who knows that the position reached by means of analytical study
can also be attained by devotional service, and who therefore seesanalytical study and devotional service to be on the same level, seesthings as they are.
PURPORTThe real purpose of philosophical research is to find the ultimate goal
of life. Since the ultimate goal of life is self-realization, there isno difference between the conclusions reached by the two processes. BySankhya philosophical research one comes to the conclusion that aliving entity is not a part and parcel of the material world but of thesupreme spirit whole. Consequently, the spirit soul has nothing to dowith the material world; his actions must be in some relation with the
Supreme. When he acts in Krsna consciousness, he is actually in his
constitutional position. In the first process, Sankhya, one has tobecome detached from matter, and in the devotional yoga process one hasto attach himself to the work of Krsna consciousness. Factually, bothprocesses are the same, although superficially one process appears toinvolve detachment and the other process appears to involve attachment.Detachment from matter and attachment to Krsna are one and the same.One who can see this sees things as they are.
TEXT 6
sannyasas tu maha-baho
duhkham aptum ayogatahyoga-yukto munir brahmana cirenadhigacchati
SYNONYMSsannyasah--the renounced order of life; tu--but; maha-baho--O mighty-
armed one; duhkham--distress; aptum--afflicts one with; ayogatah--without devotional service; yoga-yuktah--one engaged in devotionalservice; munih--a thinker; brahma--the Supreme; na cirena--withoutdelay; adhigacchati--attains.
TRANSLATIONMerely renouncing all activities yet not engaging in the devotional
service of the Lord cannot make one happy. But a thoughtful personengaged in devotional service can achieve the Supreme without delay.
PURPORTThere are two classes of sannyasis, or persons in the renounced order
of life. The Mayavadi sannyasis are engaged in the study of Sankhyaphilosophy, whereas the Vaisnava sannyasis are engaged in the study ofBhagavatam philosophy, which affords the proper commentary on theVedanta-sutras. The Mayavadi sannyasis also study the Vedanta-sutras,but use their own commentary, called Sariraka-bhasya, written bySankaracarya. The students of the Bhagavata school are engaged in thedevotional service of the Lord, according to pancaratriki regulations,and therefore the Vaisnava sannyasis have multiple engagements in thetranscendental service of the Lord. The Vaisnava sannyasis have nothingto do with material activities, and yet they perform various activitiesin their devotional service to the Lord. But the Mayavadi sannyasis,engaged in the studies of Sankhya and Vedanta and speculation, cannotrelish the transcendental service of the Lord. Because their studiesbecome very tedious, they sometimes become tired of Brahmanspeculation, and thus they take shelter of the Bhagavatam withoutproper understanding. Consequently their study of the Srimad-Bhagavatambecomes troublesome. Dry speculations and impersonal interpretations byartificial means are all useless for the Mayavadi sannyasis. TheVaisnava sannyasis, who are engaged in devotional service, are happy inthe discharge of their transcendental duties, and they have theguarantee of ultimate entrance into the kingdom of God. The Mayavadisannyasis sometimes fall down from the path of self-realization andagain enter into material activities of a philanthropic and altruisticnature, which are nothing but material engagements. Therefore, theconclusion is that those who are engaged in Krsna conscious activities
are better situated than the sannyasis engaged in simple speculation
about what is Brahman and what is not Brahman, although they too cometo Krsna consciousness, after many births.
TEXT 7
yoga-yukto visuddhatma
vijitatma jitendriyahsarva-bhutatma-bhutatmakurvann api na lipyate
SYNONYMSyoga-yuktah--engaged in devotional service; visuddha-atma--a purified
soul; vijita-atma--self-controlled; jita-indriyah--having conquered thesenses; sarva-bhuta--to all living entities; atma-bhuta-atma--compassionate; kurvan api--although engaged in work; na--never;lipyate--is entangled.
TRANSLATIONOne who works in devotion, who is a pure soul, and who controls his
mind and senses is dear to everyone, and everyone is dear to him.Though always working, such a man is never entangled.
PURPORTOne who is on the path of liberation by Krsna consciousness is very
dear to every living being, and every living being is dear to him. Thisis due to his Krsna consciousness. Such a person cannot think of anyliving being as separate from Krsna, just as the leaves and branches ofa tree are not separate from the tree. He knows very well that bypouring water on the root of the tree, the water will be distributed toall the leaves and branches, or by supplying food to the stomach, theenergy is automatically distributed throughout the body. Because onewho works in Krsna consciousness is servant to all, he is very dear toeveryone. And because everyone is satisfied by his work, he is pure inconsciousness. Because he is pure in consciousness, his mind iscompletely controlled. And because his mind is controlled, his sensesare also controlled. Because his mind is always fixed on Krsna, thereis no chance of his being deviated from Krsna. Nor is there a chancethat he will engage his senses in matters other than the service of theLord. He does not like to hear anything except topics relating toKrsna; he does not like to eat anything which is not offered to Krsna;and he does not wish to go anywhere if Krsna is not involved.Therefore, his senses are controlled. A man of controlled senses cannotbe offensive to anyone. One may ask, "Why then was Arjuna offensive (inbattle) to others? Wasn't he in Krsna consciousness?" Arjuna was onlysuperficially offensive because (as has already been explained in theSecond Chapter) all the assembled persons on the battlefield wouldcontinue to live individually, as the soul cannot be slain. So,spiritually, no one was killed on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra. Onlytheir dresses were changed by the order of Krsna, who was personallypresent. Therefore Arjuna, while fighting on the Battlefield ofKuruksetra, was not really fighting at all; he was simply carrying outthe orders of Krsna in full Krsna consciousness. Such a person is neverentangled in the reactions of work.
TEXTS 8-9
naiva kincit karomiti
yukto manyeta tattva-vitpasyan srnvan sprsan jighrannasnan gacchan svapan svasan
pralapan visrjan grhnann
unmisan nimisann apiindriyanindriyarthesuvartanta iti dharayan
SYNONYMSna--never; eva--certainly; kincit--anything; karomi--I do; iti--thus;
yuktah--engaged in the divine consciousness; manyeta--thinks; tattva-vit--one who knows the truth; pasyan--seeing; srnvan--hearing; sprsan--touching; jighran--smelling; asnan--eating; gacchan--going; svapan--dreaming; svasan--breathing; pralapan--talking; visrjan--giving up;grhnan--accepting; unmisan--opening; nimisan--closing; api--in spiteof; indriyani--the senses; indriya-arthesu--in sense gratification;vartante--let them be so engaged; iti--thus; dharayan--considering.
TRANSLATIONA person in the divine consciousness, although engaged in seeing,
hearing, touching, smelling, eating, moving about, sleeping andbreathing, always knows within himself that he actually does nothing atall. Because while speaking, evacuating, receiving, opening or closinghis eyes, he always knows that only the material senses are engagedwith their objects and that he is aloof from them.
PURPORTA person in Krsna consciousness is pure in his existence, and
consequently he has nothing to do with any work which depends upon fiveimmediate and remote causes, the doer, the work, the situation, theendeavor and fortune. This is because he is engaged in the lovingtranscendental service of Krsna. Although he appears to be acting withhis body and senses, he is always conscious of his actual position,which is spiritual engagement. In material consciousness, the sensesare engaged in sense gratification, but in Krsna consciousness thesenses are engaged in the satisfaction of Krsna's senses. Therefore,the Krsna conscious person is always free, even though he appears to beengaged in things of the senses. Activities such as seeing, hearing,speaking, evacuating, etc., are actions of the senses meant for work. AKrsna conscious person is never affected by the actions of the senses.He cannot perform any act except in the service of the Lord because heknows that he is the eternal servitor of the Lord.
TEXT 10
brahmany adhaya karmani
sangam tyaktva karoti yahlipyate na sa papenapadma-patram ivambhasa
SYNONYMS
brahmani--the Supreme Personality of Godhead; adhaya--resigning unto;
karmani--all works; sangam--attachment; tyaktva--giving up; karoti--performs; yah--who; lipyate--is affected; na--never; sah--he; papena--by sin; padma-patram--lotus leaf; iva--like; ambhasa--in the water.
TRANSLATIONOne who performs his duty without attachment, surrendering the results
unto the Supreme God, is not affected by sinful action, as the lotusleaf is untouched by water.
PURPORTHere brahmani means in Krsna consciousness. The material world is a sum
total manifestation of the three modes of material nature, technicallycalled the pradhana. The Vedic hymns sarvam hy etad brahma (MandukyaUpanisad 2), tasmad etad brahma nama-rupam annam ca jayate (MundakaUpanisad 1.2.10), and, in the Bhagavad-gita (14.3), mama yonir mahadbrahma, indicate that everything in the material world is themanifestation of Brahman; and, although the effects are differentlymanifested, they are nondifferent from the cause. In the Isopanisad itis said that everything is related to the Supreme Brahman, or Krsna,and thus everything belongs to Him only. One who knows perfectly wellthat everything belongs to Krsna, that He is the proprietor ofeverything and that, therefore, everything is engaged in the service ofthe Lord, naturally has nothing to do with the results of hisactivities, whether virtuous or sinful. Even one's material body, beinga gift of the Lord for carrying out a particular type of action, can beengaged in Krsna consciousness. It is beyond contamination by sinfulreactions, exactly as the lotus leaf, though remaining in the water, isnot wet. The Lord also says in the Gita (3.30), mayi sarvani karmanisannyasya: "Resign all works unto Me [Krsna]." The conclusion is that aperson without Krsna consciousness acts according to the concept of thematerial body and senses, but a person in Krsna consciousness actsaccording to the knowledge that the body is the property of Krsna andshould therefore be engaged in the service of Krsna.
TEXT 11
kayena manasa buddhya
kevalair indriyair apiyoginah karma kurvantisangam tyaktvatma-suddhaye
SYNONYMSkayena--with the body; manasa--with the mind; buddhya--with the
intelligence; kevalaih--purified; indriyaih--with the senses; api--evenwith; yoginah--Krsna conscious persons; karma--actions; kurvanti--theyact; sangam--attachment; tyaktva--giving up; atma--self; suddhaye--forthe purpose of purification.
TRANSLATIONThe yogis, abandoning attachment, act with body, mind, intelligence,
and even with the senses, only for the purpose of purification.
PURPORT
By acting in Krsna consciousness for the satisfaction of the senses of
Krsna, any action, whether of the body, mind, intelligence or even thesenses, is purified of material contamination. There are no materialreactions resulting from the activities of a Krsna conscious person.Therefore, purified activities, which are generally called sad-acara,can be easily performed by acting in Krsna consciousness. Sri RupaGosvami in his Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.2.187) describes this asfollows:
iha yasya harer dasye
karmana manasa giranikhilasv apy avasthasujivan-muktah sa ucyate
"A person acting in Krsna consciousness (or, in other words, in the
service of Krsna) with his body, mind, intelligence and words is aliberated person even within the material world, although he may beengaged in many so-called material activities." He has no false ego,nor does he believe that he is this material body, nor that hepossesses the body. He knows that he is not this body and that thisbody does not belong to him. He himself belongs to Krsna, and the bodytoo belongs to Krsna. When he applies everything produced of the body,mind, intelligence, words, life, wealth, etc.--whatever he may havewithin his possession--to Krsna's service, he is at once dovetailedwith Krsna. He is one with Krsna and is devoid of the false ego thatleads one to believe that he is the body, etc. This is the perfectstage of Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 12
yuktah karma-phalam tyaktva
santim apnoti naisthikimayuktah kama-karenaphale sakto nibadhyate
SYNONYMSyuktah--one who is engaged in devotional service; karma-phalam--the
results of all activities; tyaktva--giving up; santim--perfect peace;apnoti--achieves; naisthikim--unflinching; ayuktah--one who is not inKrsna consciousness; kama-karena--for enjoying the result of work;phale--in the result; saktah--attached; nibadhyate--becomes entangled.
TRANSLATIONThe steadily devoted soul attains unadulterated peace because he offers
the result of all activities to Me; whereas a person who is not inunion with the Divine, who is greedy for the fruits of his labor,becomes entangled.
PURPORTThe difference between a person in Krsna consciousness and a person in
bodily consciousness is that the former is attached to Krsna whereasthe latter is attached to the results of his activities. The person whois attached to Krsna and works for Him only is certainly a liberated
person, and he is not anxious for fruitive rewards. In the Bhagavatam,
the cause of anxiety over the result of an activity is explained asbeing one's functioning in the conception of duality, that is, withoutknowledge of the Absolute Truth. Krsna is the Supreme Absolute Truth,the Personality of Godhead. In Krsna consciousness, there is noduality. All that exists is a product of Krsna's energy, and Krsna isall good. Therefore, activities in Krsna consciousness are on theabsolute plane; they are transcendental and have no material effect.One is, therefore, filled with peace in Krsna consciousness. One whois, however, entangled in profit calculation for sense gratificationcannot have that peace. This is the secret of Krsna consciousness--realization that there is no existence besides Krsna is the platform ofpeace and fearlessness.
TEXT 13
sarva-karmani manasa
sannyasyaste sukham vasinava-dvare pure dehinaiva kurvan na karayan
SYNONYMSsarva--all; karmani--activities; manasa--by the mind; sannyasya--giving
up; aste--remains; sukham--in happiness; vasi--one who is controlled;nava-dvare--in the place where there are nine gates; pure--in the city;dehi--the embodied soul; na--never; eva--certainly; kurvan--doinganything; na--not; karayan--causing to be done.
TRANSLATIONWhen the embodied living being controls his nature and mentally
renounces all actions, he resides happily in the city of nine gates[the material body], neither working nor causing work to be done.
PURPORTThe embodied soul lives in the city of nine gates. The activities of
the body, or the figurative city of body, are conducted automaticallyby the particular modes of nature. The soul, although subjectinghimself to the conditions of the body, can be beyond those conditions,if he so desires. Owing only to forgetfulness of his superior nature,he identifies with the material body, and therefore suffers. By Krsnaconsciousness, he can revive his real position and thus come out of hisembodiment. Therefore, when one takes to Krsna consciousness, one atonce becomes completely aloof from bodily activities. In such acontrolled life, in which his deliberations are changed, he liveshappily within the city of nine gates. The nine gates are described asfollows:
nava-dvare pure dehi
hamso lelayate bahihvasi sarvasya lokasyasthavarasya carasya ca
"The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is living within the body of a
living entity, is the controller of all living entities all over theuniverse. The body consists of nine gates [two eyes, two nostrils, two
ears, one mouth, the anus and the genitals]. The living entity in his
conditioned stage identifies himself with the body, but when heidentifies himself with the Lord within himself, he becomes just asfree as the Lord, even while in the body." (Svetasvatara Upanisad 3.18)Therefore, a Krsna conscious person is free from both the outer andinner activities of the material body.
TEXT 14
na kartrtvam na karmani
lokasya srjati prabhuhna karma-phala-samyogamsvabhavas tu pravartate
SYNONYMSna--never; kartrtvam--proprietorship; na--nor; karmani--activities;
lokasya--of the people; srjati--creates; prabhuh--the master of thecity of the body; na--nor; karma-phala--with the results of activities;samyogam--connection; svabhavah--the modes of material nature; tu--but;pravartate--act.
TRANSLATIONThe embodied spirit, master of the city of his body, does not create
activities, nor does he induce people to act, nor does he create thefruits of action. All this is enacted by the modes of material nature.
PURPORTThe living entity, as will be explained in the Seventh Chapter, is one
of the energies or natures of the Supreme Lord but is distinct frommatter, which is another nature--called inferior--of the Lord. Somehowthe superior nature, the living entity, has been in contact withmaterial nature since time immemorial. The temporary body or materialdwelling place which he obtains is the cause of varieties of activitiesand their resultant reactions. Living in such a conditional atmosphere,one suffers the results of the activities of the body by identifyinghimself (in ignorance) with the body. It is ignorance acquired fromtime immemorial that is the cause of bodily suffering and distress. Assoon as the living entity becomes aloof from the activities of thebody, he becomes free from the reactions as well. As long as he is inthe city of body, he appears to be the master of it, but actually he isneither its proprietor nor controller of its actions and reactions. Heis simply in the midst of the material ocean, struggling for existence.The waves of the ocean are tossing him, and he has no control overthem. His best solution is to get out of the water by transcendentalKrsna consciousness. That alone will save him from all turmoil.
TEXT 15
nadatte kasyacit papam
na caiva sukrtam vibhuhajnanenavrtam jnanamtena muhyanti jantavah
SYNONYMS
na--never; adatte--accepts; kasyacit--anyone's; papam--sin; na--nor;
ca--also; eva--certainly; su-krtam--pious activities; vibhuh--theSupreme Lord; ajnanena--by ignorance; avrtam--covered; jnanam--knowledge; tena--by that; muhyanti--are bewildered; jantavah--theliving entities.
TRANSLATIONNor does the Supreme Lord assume anyone's sinful or pious activities.
Embodied beings, however, are bewildered because of the ignorance whichcovers their real knowledge.
PURPORTThe Sanskrit word vibhu means the Supreme Lord who is full of unlimited
knowledge, riches, strength, fame, beauty and renunciation. He isalways satisfied in Himself, undisturbed by sinful or pious activities.He does not create a particular situation for any living entity, butthe living entity, bewildered by ignorance, desires to be put intocertain conditions of life, and thereby his chain of action andreaction begins. A living entity is, by superior nature, full ofknowledge. Nevertheless, he is prone to be influenced by ignorance dueto his limited power. The Lord is omnipotent, but the living entity isnot. The Lord is vibhu, or omniscient, but the living entity is anu, oratomic. Because he is a living soul, he has the capacity to desire byhis free will. Such desire is fulfilled only by the omnipotent Lord.And so, when the living entity is bewildered in his desires, the Lordallows him to fulfill those desires, but the Lord is never responsiblefor the actions and reactions of the particular situation which may bedesired. Being in a bewildered condition, therefore, the embodied soulidentifies himself with the circumstantial material body and becomessubjected to the temporary misery and happiness of life. The Lord isthe constant companion of the living entity as Paramatma, or theSupersoul, and therefore He can understand the desires of theindividual soul, as one can smell the flavor of a flower by being nearit. Desire is a subtle form of conditioning for the living entity. TheLord fulfills his desire as he deserves: Man proposes and God disposes.The individual is not, therefore, omnipotent in fulfilling his desires.The Lord, however, can fulfill all desires, and the Lord, being neutralto everyone, does not interfere with the desires of the minuteindependent living entities. However, when one desires Krsna, the Lordtakes special care and encourages one to desire in such a way that onecan attain to Him and be eternally happy. The Vedic hymns thereforedeclare:
esa u hy eva sadhu karma karayati tam yam ebhyo lokebhya unninisate.
esa u evasadhu karma karayati yam adho ninisate
"The Lord engages the living entity in pious activities so that he may
be elevated. The Lord engages him in impious activities so that he maygo to hell." (Kausitaki Upanisad 3.8)
ajno jantur aniso 'yam
atmanah sukha-duhkhayohisvara-prerito gacchetsvargam vasv abhram eva ca
"The living entity is completely dependent in his distress and
happiness. By the will of the Supreme he can go to heaven or hell, as acloud is driven by the air."Therefore the embodied soul, by his immemorial desire to avoid Krsnaconsciousness, causes his own bewilderment. Consequently, although heis constitutionally eternal, blissful and cognizant, due to thelittleness of his existence he forgets his constitutional position ofservice to the Lord and is thus entrapped by nescience. And, under thespell of ignorance, the living entity claims that the Lord isresponsible for his conditional existence. The Vedanta-sutras (2.1.34)also confirm this. Vaisamya-nairghrnye na sapeksatvat tatha hidarsayati: "The Lord neither hates nor likes anyone, though He appearsto."
TEXT 16
jnanena tu tad ajnanam
yesam nasitam atmanahtesam aditya-vaj jnanamprakasayati tat param
SYNONYMSjnanena--by knowledge; tu--but; tat--that; ajnanam--nescience; yesam--
whose; nasitam--is destroyed; atmanah--of the living entity; tesam--their; aditya-vat--like the rising sun; jnanam--knowledge; prakasayati--discloses; tat param--Krsna consciousness.
TRANSLATION
When, however, one is enlightened with the knowledge by which nescience
is destroyed, then his knowledge reveals everything, as the sun lightsup everything in the daytime.
PURPORTThose who have forgotten Krsna must certainly be bewildered, but those
who are in Krsna consciousness are not bewildered at all. It is statedin the Bhagavad-gita, sarvam jnana-plavena, jnanagnih sarva-karmani andna hi jnanena sadrsam. Knowledge is always highly esteemed. And what isthat knowledge? Perfect knowledge is achieved when one surrenders untoKrsna, as is said in the Seventh Chapter, 19th verse: bahunam janmanamante jnanavan mam prapadyate. After passing through many, many births,when one perfect in knowledge surrenders unto Krsna, or when oneattains Krsna consciousness, then everything is revealed to him, aseverything is revealed by the sun in the daytime. The living entity isbewildered in so many ways. For instance, when he unceremoniouslythinks himself God, he actually falls into the last snare of nescience.If a living entity is God, then how can he become bewildered bynescience? Does God become bewildered by nescience? If so, thennescience, or Satan, is greater than God. Real knowledge can beobtained from a person who is in perfect Krsna consciousness.Therefore, one has to seek out such a bona fide spiritual master and,under him, learn what Krsna consciousness is, for Krsna consciousnesswill certainly drive away all nescience, as the sun drives awaydarkness. Even though a person may be in full knowledge that he is notthis body but is transcendental to the body, he still may not be able
to discriminate between the soul and the Supersoul. However, he can
know everything well if he cares to take shelter of the perfect, bonafide Krsna conscious spiritual master. One can know God and one'srelationship with God only when one actually meets a representative ofGod. A representative of God never claims that he is God, although heis paid all the respect ordinarily paid to God because he has knowledgeof God. One has to learn the distinction between God and the livingentity. Lord Sri Krsna therefore stated in the Second Chapter (2.12)that every living being is individual and that the Lord also isindividual. They were all individuals in the past, they are individualsat present, and they will continue to be individuals in the future,even after liberation. At night we see everything as one in thedarkness, but in day, when the sun is up, we see everything in its realidentity. Identity with individuality in spiritual life is realknowledge.
TEXT 17
tad-buddhayas tad-atmanas
tan-nisthas tat-parayanahgacchanty apunar-avrttimjnana-nirdhuta-kalmasah
SYNONYMStat-buddhayah--one whose intelligence is always in the Supreme; tat-
atmanah--one whose mind is always in the Supreme; tat-nisthah--whosemind is only meant for the Supreme; tat-parayanah--who has completelytaken shelter of Him; gacchanti--go; apunah-avrttim--liberation; jnana--knowledge; nirdhuta--cleanses; kalmasah--misgivings.
TRANSLATIONWhen one's intelligence, mind, faith and refuge are all fixed in the
Supreme, then one becomes fully cleansed of misgivings through completeknowledge and thus proceeds straight on the path of liberation.
PURPORTThe Supreme Transcendental Truth is Lord Krsna. The whole Bhagavad-gita
centers around the declaration that Krsna is the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. That is the version of all Vedic literature. Para-tattva meansthe Supreme Reality, who is understood by the knowers of the Supreme asBrahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan. Bhagavan, or the Supreme Personalityof Godhead, is the last word in the Absolute. There is nothing morethan that. The Lord says, mattah parataram nanyat kincid astidhananjaya. Impersonal Brahman is also supported by Krsna: brahmano hipratisthaham. Therefore in all ways Krsna is the Supreme Reality. Onewhose mind, intelligence, faith and refuge are always in Krsna, or, inother words, one who is fully in Krsna consciousness, is undoubtedlywashed clean of all misgivings and is in perfect knowledge ineverything concerning transcendence. A Krsna conscious person canthoroughly understand that there is duality (simultaneous identity andindividuality) in Krsna, and, equipped with such transcendentalknowledge, one can make steady progress on the path of liberation.
TEXT 18
vidya-vinaya-sampanne
brahmane gavi hastinisuni caiva sva-pake capanditah sama-darsinah
SYNONYMSvidya--education; vinaya--gentleness; sampanne--fully equipped;
brahmane--in the brahmana; gavi--in the cow; hastini--in the elephant;suni--in the dog; ca--and; eva--certainly; sva-pake--in the dog-eater(the outcaste); ca--respectively; panditah--those who are so wise;sama-darsinah--do see with equal vision.
TRANSLATIONThe humble sage, by virtue of true knowledge, sees with equal vision a
learned and gentle brahmana, a cow, an elephant, a dog and a dog-eater[outcaste].
PURPORTA Krsna conscious person does not make any distinction between species
or castes. The brahmana and the outcaste may be different from thesocial point of view, or a dog, a cow, and an elephant may be differentfrom the point of view of species, but these differences of body aremeaningless from the viewpoint of a learned transcendentalist. This isdue to their relationship to the Supreme, for the Supreme Lord, by Hisplenary portion as Paramatma, is present in everyone's heart. Such anunderstanding of the Supreme is real knowledge. As far as the bodiesare concerned in different castes or different species of life, theLord is equally kind to everyone because He treats every living beingas a friend yet maintains Himself as Paramatma regardless of thecircumstances of the living entities. The Lord as Paramatma is presentin both the outcaste and in the brahmana, although the body of abrahmana and that of an outcaste are not the same. The bodies arematerial productions of different modes of material nature, but thesoul and the Supersoul within the body are of the same spiritualquality. The similarity in the quality of the soul and the Supersoul,however, does not make them equal in quantity, for the individual soulis present only in that particular body whereas the Paramatma ispresent in each and every body. A Krsna conscious person has fullknowledge of this, and therefore he is truly learned and has equalvision. The similar characteristics of the soul and the Supersoul arethat they are both conscious, eternal and blissful. But the differenceis that the individual soul is conscious within the limitedjurisdiction of the body whereas the Supersoul is conscious of allbodies. The Supersoul is present in all bodies without distinction.
TEXT 19
ihaiva tair jitah sargo
yesam samye sthitam manahnirdosam hi samam brahmatasmad brahmani te sthitah
SYNONYMS
iha--in this life; eva--certainly; taih--by them; jitah--conquered;
sargah--birth and death; yesam--of those; samye--in equanimity;sthitam--so situated; manah--mind; nirdosam--flawless; hi--certainly;samam--in equanimity; brahma--the Supreme; tasmat--therefore; brahmani--in the Supreme; te--they; sthitah--are situated.
TRANSLATIONThose whose minds are established in sameness and equanimity have
already conquered the conditions of birth and death. They are flawlesslike Brahman, and thus they are already situated in Brahman.
PURPORTEquanimity of mind, as mentioned above, is the sign of self-
realization. Those who have actually attained to such a stage should beconsidered to have conquered material conditions, specifically birthand death. As long as one identifies with this body, he is considered aconditioned soul, but as soon as he is elevated to the stage ofequanimity through realization of self, he is liberated fromconditional life. In other words, he is no longer subject to take birthin the material world but can enter into the spiritual sky after hisdeath. The Lord is flawless because He is without attraction or hatred.Similarly, when a living entity is without attraction or hatred, healso becomes flawless and eligible to enter into the spiritual sky.Such persons are to be considered already liberated, and their symptomsare described below.
TEXT 20
na prahrsyet priyam prapya
nodvijet prapya capriyamsthira-buddhir asammudhobrahma-vid brahmani sthitah
SYNONYMSna--never; prahrsyet--rejoice; priyam--pleasant; prapya--achieving; na-
-does not; udvijet--agitated; prapya--obtaining; ca--also; apriyam--unpleasant; sthira-buddhih--self-intelligent; asammudhah--unbewildered;brahma-vit--one who knows the Supreme perfectly; brahmani--in thetranscendence; sthitah--situated.
TRANSLATIONA person who neither rejoices upon achieving something pleasant nor
laments upon obtaining something unpleasant, who is self-intelligent,unbewildered, and who knows the science of God, is to be understood asalready situated in transcendence.
PURPORTThe symptoms of the self-realized person are given herein. The first
symptom is that he is not illusioned by the false identification of thebody with his true self. He knows perfectly well that he is not thisbody, but is the fragmental portion of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. He is therefore not joyful in achieving something, nor does helament in losing anything which is related to his body. This steadiness
of mind is called sthira-buddhi, or self-intelligence. He is therefore
never bewildered by mistaking the gross body for the soul, nor does heaccept the body as permanent and disregard the existence of the soul.This knowledge elevates him to the station of knowing the completescience of the Absolute Truth, namely Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan.He thus knows his constitutional position perfectly well, withoutfalsely trying to become one with the Supreme in all respects. This iscalled Brahman realization, or self-realization. Such steadyconsciousness is called Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 21
bahya-sparsesv asaktatma
vindaty atmani yat sukhamsa brahma-yoga-yuktatmasukham aksayam asnute
SYNONYMSbahya-sparsesu--in external sense pleasure; asakta-atma--one who is not
so attached; vindati--enjoys; atmani--in the self; yat--that which;sukham--happiness; sah--that; brahma-yoga--concentrated in Brahman;yukta-atma--self-connected; sukham--happiness; aksayam--unlimited;asnute--enjoys.
TRANSLATIONSuch a liberated person is not attracted to material sense pleasure or
external objects but is always in trance, enjoying the pleasure within.In this way the self-realized person enjoys unlimited happiness, for heconcentrates on the Supreme.
PURPORTSri Yamunacarya, a great devotee in Krsna consciousness, said:yad-avadhi mama cetah krsna-padaravinde
nava-nava-rasa-dhamany udyatam rantum asittad-avadhi bata nari-sangame smaryamanebhavati mukha-vikarah susthu nisthivanam ca
"Since I have been engaged in the transcendental loving service of
Krsna, realizing ever-new pleasure in Him, whenever I think of sexpleasure, I spit at the thought, and my lips curl with distaste." Aperson in brahma-yoga, or Krsna consciousness, is so absorbed in theloving service of the Lord that he loses his taste for material sensepleasure altogether. The highest pleasure in terms of matter is sexpleasure. The whole world is moving under its spell, and a materialistcannot work at all without this motivation. But a person engaged inKrsna consciousness can work with greater vigor without sex pleasure,which he avoids. That is the test in spiritual realization. Spiritualrealization and sex pleasure go ill together. A Krsna conscious personis not attracted to any kind of sense pleasure due to his being aliberated soul.
TEXT 22
ye hi samsparsa-ja bhoga
duhkha-yonaya eva te
ady-antavantah kaunteyana tesu ramate budhah
SYNONYMSye--those; hi--certainly; samsparsa-jah--by contact with the material
senses; bhogah--enjoyments; duhkha--distress; yonayah--sources of; eva--certainly; te--they are; adi--beginning; anta--end; vantah--subjectto; kaunteya--O son of Kunti; na--never; tesu--in those; ramate--takesdelight; budhah--the intelligent person.
TRANSLATIONAn intelligent person does not take part in the sources of misery,
which are due to contact with the material senses. O son of Kunti, suchpleasures have a beginning and an end, and so the wise man does notdelight in them.
PURPORTMaterial sense pleasures are due to the contact of the material senses,
which are all temporary because the body itself is temporary. Aliberated soul is not interested in anything which is temporary.Knowing well the joys of transcendental pleasures, how can a liberatedsoul agree to enjoy false pleasure? In the Padma Purana it is said:
ramante yogino 'nante
satyanande cid-atmaniiti rama-padenasauparam brahmabhidhiyate
"The mystics derive unlimited transcendental pleasures from the
Absolute Truth, and therefore the Supreme Absolute Truth, thePersonality of Godhead, is also known as Rama."In the Srimad-Bhagavatam also (5.5.1) it is said:
nayam deho deha-bhajam nr-loke
kastan kaman arhate vid-bhujam yetapo divyam putraka yena sattvamsuddhyed yasmad brahma-saukhyam tv anantam
"My dear sons, there is no reason to labor very hard for sense pleasure
while in this human form of life; such pleasures are available to thestool-eaters [hogs]. Rather, you should undergo penances in this lifeby which your existence will be purified, and, as a result, you will beable to enjoy unlimited transcendental bliss."Therefore, those who are true yogis or learned transcendentalists arenot attracted by sense pleasures, which are the causes of continuousmaterial existence. The more one is addicted to material pleasures, themore he is entrapped by material miseries.
TEXT 23
saknotihaiva yah sodhum
prak sarira-vimoksanatkama-krodhodbhavam vegamsa yuktah sa sukhi narah
SYNONYMS
saknoti--able to do; iha eva--in the present body; yah--one who;
sodhum--to tolerate; prak--before; sarira--body; vimoksanat--give up;kama--desire; krodha--anger; udbhavam--generated from; vegam--urge;sah--he; yuktah--in trance; sah--he; sukhi--happy; narah--human being.
TRANSLATIONBefore giving up this present body, if one is able to tolerate the
urges of the material senses and check the force of desire and anger,he is a yogi and is happy in this world.
PURPORTIf one wants to make steady progress on the path of self-realization,
he must try to control the forces of the material senses. There are theforces of talk, forces of anger, forces of mind, forces of the stomach,forces of the genitals, and forces of the tongue. One who is able tocontrol the forces of all these different senses, and the mind, iscalled gosvami, or svami. Such gosvamis live strictly controlled lives,and forgo altogether the forces of the senses. Material desires, whenunsatiated, generate anger, and thus the mind, eyes and chest becomeagitated. Therefore, one must practice to control them before one givesup this material body. One who can do this is understood to be self-realized and is thus happy in the state of self-realization. It is theduty of the transcendentalist to try strenuously to control desire andanger.
TEXT 24
yo 'ntah-sukho 'ntar-aramas
tathantar-jyotir eva yahsa yogi brahma-nirvanambrahma-bhuto 'dhigacchati
SYNONYMSyah--one who; antah-sukhah--happy from within; antah-aramah--active
within; tatha--as well as; antah-jyotih--aiming within; eva--certainly;yah--anyone; sah--he; yogi--mystic; brahma-nirvanam--liberated in theSupreme; brahma-bhutah--self-realized; adhigacchati--attains.
TRANSLATIONOne whose happiness is within, who is active within, who rejoices
within and is illumined within, is actually the perfect mystic. He isliberated in the Supreme, and ultimately he attains the Supreme.
PURPORTUnless one is able to relish happiness from within, how can one retire
from the external engagements meant for deriving superficial happiness?A liberated person enjoys happiness by factual experience. He can,therefore, sit silently at any place and enjoy the activities of lifefrom within. Such a liberated person no longer desires external
material happiness. This state is called brahma-bhuta, attaining which
one is assured of going back to Godhead, back to home.
TEXT 25
labhante brahma-nirvanam
rsayah ksina-kalmasahchinna-dvaidha yatatmanahsarva-bhuta-hite ratah
SYNONYMSlabhante--achieve; brahma-nirvanam--liberation in the Supreme; rsayah--
those who are active within; ksina-kalmasah--who are devoid of allsins; chinna--torn off; dvaidhah--duality; yata-atmanah--engaged inself-realization; sarva-bhuta--in all living entities; hite--in welfarework; ratah--engaged.
TRANSLATIONOne who is beyond duality and doubt, whose mind is engaged within, who
is always busy working for the welfare of all sentient beings, and whois free from all sins, achieves liberation in the Supreme.
PURPORTOnly a person who is fully in Krsna consciousness can be said to be
engaged in welfare work for all living entities. When a person isactually in the knowledge that Krsna is the fountainhead of everything,then when he acts in that spirit he acts for everyone. The sufferingsof humanity are due to forgetfulness of Krsna as the supreme enjoyer,the supreme proprietor, and the supreme friend. Therefore, to act torevive this consciousness within the entire human society is thehighest welfare work. One cannot be engaged in first-class welfare workwithout being liberated in the Supreme. A Krsna conscious person has nodoubt about the supremacy of Krsna. He has no doubt because he iscompletely freed from all sins. This is the state of divine love.A person engaged only in ministering to the physical welfare of humansociety cannot factually help anyone. Temporary relief of the externalbody and the mind is not satisfactory. The real cause of one'sdifficulties in the hard struggle for life may be found in one'sforgetfulness of his relationship with the Supreme Lord. When a man isfully conscious of his relationship with Krsna, he is actually aliberated soul, although he may be in the material tabernacle.
TEXT 26
kama-krodha-vimuktanam
yatinam yata-cetasamabhito brahma-nirvanamvartate viditatmanam
SYNONYMSkama--desires; krodha--anger; vimuktanam--of those who are so
liberated; yatinam--of the saintly persons; yata-cetasam--of personswho have full control over the mind; abhitah--assured in the near
future; brahma-nirvanam--liberation in the Supreme; vartate--is there;
vidita-atmanam--of those who are self-realized.
TRANSLATIONThose who are free from anger and all material desires, who are self-
realized, self-disciplined and constantly endeavoring for perfection,are assured of liberation in the Supreme in the very near future.
PURPORTOf the saintly persons who are constantly engaged in striving toward
salvation, one who is in Krsna consciousness is the best of all. TheBhagavatam (4.22.39) confirms this fact as follows:
yat-pada-pankaja-palasa-vilasa-bhaktya
karmasayam grathitam udgrathayanti santahtadvan na rikta-matayo yatayo 'pi ruddha-sroto-ganas tam aranam bhaja vasudevam
"Just try to worship, in devotional service, Vasudeva, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Even great sages are not able to control theforces of the senses as effectively as those who are engaged intranscendental bliss by serving the lotus feet of the Lord, uprootingthe deep grown desire for fruitive activities."In the conditioned soul the desire to enjoy the fruitive results ofwork is so deep-rooted that it is very difficult even for the greatsages to control such desires, despite great endeavors. A devotee ofthe Lord, constantly engaged in devotional service in Krsnaconsciousness, perfect in self-realization, very quickly attainsliberation in the Supreme. Owing to his complete knowledge in self-realization, he always remains in trance. To cite an analogous exampleof this:
darsana-dhyana-samsparsair
matsya-kurma-vihangamahsvany apatyani pusnantitathaham api padma-ja
"By vision, by meditation and by touch only do the fish, the tortoise
and the birds maintain their offspring. Similarly do I also, OPadmaja!"The fish brings up its offspring simply by looking at them. Thetortoise brings up its offspring simply by meditation. The eggs of thetortoise are laid on land, and the tortoise meditates on the eggs whilein the water. Similarly, a devotee in Krsna consciousness, although faraway from the Lord's abode, can elevate himself to that abode simply bythinking of Him constantly--by engagement in Krsna consciousness. Hedoes not feel the pangs of material miseries; this state of life iscalled brahma-nirvana, or the absence of material miseries due to beingconstantly immersed in the Supreme.
TEXTS 27-28
sparsan krtva bahir bahyams
caksus caivantare bhruvohpranapanau samau krtvanasabhyantara-carinau
yatendriya-mano-buddhir
munir moksa-parayanahvigateccha-bhaya-krodhoyah sada mukta eva sah
SYNONYMSsparsan--external sense objects, such as sound, etc.; krtva--keeping;
bahih--external; bahyan--unnecessary; caksuh--eyes; ca--also; eva--certainly; antare--within; bhruvoh--of the eyebrows; prana-apanau--up-and down-moving air; samau--in suspension; krtva--doing so; nasa-abhyantara--within the nostrils; carinau--blowing; yata--controlled;indriya--senses; manah--mind; buddhih--intelligence; munih--thetranscendentalist; moksa--liberation; parayanah--being so destined;vigata--discarded; iccha--wishes; bhaya--fear; krodhah--anger; yah--onewho; sada--always; muktah--liberated; eva--certainly; sah--he is.
TRANSLATIONShutting out all external sense objects, keeping the eyes and vision
concentrated between the two eyebrows, suspending the inward andoutward breaths within the nostrils--thus controlling the mind, sensesand intelligence, the transcendentalist becomes free from desire, fearand anger. One who is always in this state is certainly liberated.
PURPORTBeing engaged in Krsna consciousness, one can immediately understand
one's spiritual identity, and then one can understand the Supreme Lordby means of devotional service. When he is well situated in devotionalservice, one comes to the transcendental position, qualified to feelthe presence of the Lord in the sphere of one's activity. Thisparticular position is called liberation in the Supreme.After explaining the above principles of liberation in the Supreme, theLord gives instruction to Arjuna as to how one can come to thatposition by the practice of the mysticism or yoga, known as astanga-yoga, which is divisible into an eightfold procedure called yama,niyama, asana, pranayama, pratyahara, dharana, dhyana, and samadhi. Inthe Sixth Chapter the subject of yoga is explicitly detailed, and atthe end of the Fifth it is only preliminarily explained. One has todrive out the sense objects such as sound, touch, form, taste and smellby the pratyahara (breathing) process in yoga, and then keep the visionof the eyes between the two eyebrows and concentrate on the tip of thenose with half closed lids. There is no benefit in closing the eyesaltogether, because then there is every chance of falling asleep. Noris there benefit in opening the eyes completely, because then there isthe hazard of being attracted by sense objects. The breathing movementis restrained within the nostrils by neutralizing the up- and down-moving air within the body. By practice of such yoga one is able togain control over the senses, refrain from outward sense objects, andthus prepare oneself for liberation in the Supreme.This yoga process helps one become free from all kinds of fear andanger and thus feel the presence of the Supersoul in the transcendentalsituation. In other words, Krsna consciousness is the easiest processof executing yoga principles. This will be thoroughly explained in thenext chapter. A Krsna conscious person, however, being always engagedin devotional service, does not risk losing his senses to some other
engagement. This is a better way of controlling the senses than by the
astanga-yoga.
TEXT 29
bhoktaram yajna-tapasam
sarva-loka-mahesvaramsuhrdam sarva-bhutanamjnatva mam santim rcchati
SYNONYMSbhoktaram--beneficiary; yajna--sacrifices; tapasam--of penances and
austerities; sarva-loka--all planets and the demigods thereof; maha-isvaram--the Supreme Lord; su-hrdam--benefactor; sarva--all; bhutanam--of the living entities; jnatva--thus knowing; mam--Me (Lord Krsna);santim--relief from material pangs; rcchati--achieves.
TRANSLATIONThe sages, knowing Me as the ultimate purpose of all sacrifices and
austerities, the Supreme Lord of all planets and demigods and thebenefactor and well-wisher of all living entities, attain peace fromthe pangs of material miseries.
PURPORTThe conditioned souls within the clutches of illusory energy are all
anxious to attain peace in the material world. But they do not know theformula for peace, which is explained in this part of the Bhagavad-gita. The greatest peace formula is simply this: Lord Krsna is thebeneficiary in all human activities. Men should offer everything to thetranscendental service of the Lord because He is the proprietor of allplanets and the demigods thereon. No one is greater than He. He isgreater than the greatest of the demigods, Lord Siva and Lord Brahma.In the Vedas (Svetasvatara Upanisad 6.7) the Supreme Lord is describedas tam isvaranam paramam mahesvaram. Under the spell of illusion,living entities are trying to be lords of all they survey, but actuallythey are dominated by the material energy of the Lord. The Lord is themaster of material nature, and the conditioned souls are under thestringent rules of material nature. Unless one understands these barefacts, it is not possible to achieve peace in the world eitherindividually or collectively. This is the sense of Krsna consciousness:Lord Krsna is the supreme predominator, and all living entities,including the great demigods, are His subordinates. One can attainperfect peace only in complete Krsna consciousness.This Fifth Chapter is a practical explanation of Krsna consciousness,generally known as karma-yoga. The question of mental speculation as tohow karma-yoga can give liberation is answered herewith. To work inKrsna consciousness is to work with the complete knowledge of the Lordas the predominator. Such work is not different from transcendentalknowledge. Direct Krsna consciousness is bhakti-yoga, and jnana-yoga isa path leading to bhakti-yoga. Krsna consciousness means to work infull knowledge of one's relationship with the Supreme Absolute, and theperfection of this consciousness is full knowledge of Krsna, or theSupreme Personality of Godhead. A pure soul is the eternal servant ofGod as His fragmental part and parcel. He comes into contact with maya(illusion) due to the desire to lord it over maya, and that is the
