the different modes of material nature, goodness, passion and
ignorance. Due to the association of these three modes, his desire todominate the material world is there. By engagement in devotionalservice in full Krsna consciousness, he is immediately situated in thetranscendental position, and his unlawful desire to control materialnature is removed. Therefore the process of devotional service beginswith hearing, chanting, remembering--the prescribed nine methods forrealizing devotional service--should be practiced in the association ofdevotees. Gradually, by such association, by the influence of thespiritual master, one's material desire to dominate is removed, and onebecomes firmly situated in the Lord's transcendental loving service.This method is prescribed from the twenty-second to the last verse ofthis chapter. Devotional service to the Lord is very simple: one shouldalways engage in the service of the Lord, should eat the remnants offoodstuffs offered to the Deity, smell the flowers offered to the lotusfeet of the Lord, see the places where the Lord had His transcendentalpastimes, read of the different activities of the Lord, Hisreciprocation of love with His devotees, chant always thetranscendental vibration Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, HareHare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, and observe thefasting days commemorating the appearances and disappearances of theLord and His devotees. By following such a process one becomescompletely detached from all material activities. One who can thussituate himself in the brahma-jyoti is equal to the Supreme Personalityof Godhead in quality.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Fourteenth Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of the Three Modes of MaterialNature.
Chapter 15
The Yoga of the Supreme Person
TEXT 1
sri-bhagavan uvaca
urdhva-mulam adhah-sakhamasvattham prahur avyayamchandamsi yasya parnaniyas tam veda sa veda-vit
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; urdhva-
mulam--with roots above; adhah--downwards; sakham--branches; asvattham--banyan tree; prahuh--said; avyayam--eternal; chandamsi--Vedic hymns;yasya--of which; parnani--the leaves; yah--anyone; tam--that; veda--knows; sah--he; veda-vit--the knower of the Vedas.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: There is a banyan tree which has its roots
upward and its branches down and whose leaves are the Vedic hymns. Onewho knows this tree is the knower of the Vedas.
PURPORT
After the discussion of the importance of bhakti-yoga, one may
question, "What about the Vedas?" It is explained in this chapter thatthe purpose of Vedic study is to understand Krsna. Therefore one who isin Krsna consciousness, who is engaged in devotional service, alreadyknows the Vedas.The entanglement of this material world is compared here to a banyantree. For one who is engaged in fruitive activities, there is no end tothe banyan tree. He wanders from one branch to another, to another, toanother. The tree of this material world has no end, and for one who isattached to this tree, there is no possibility of liberation. The Vedichymns, meant for elevating oneself, are called the leaves of this tree.This tree's roots grow upward because they begin from where Brahma islocated, the topmost planet of this universe. If one can understandthis indestructible tree of illusion, then one can get out of it.This process of extrication should be understood. In the previouschapters it has been explained that there are many processes by whichto get out of the material entanglement. And, up to the ThirteenthChapter, we have seen that devotional service to the Supreme Lord isthe best way. Now, the basic principle of devotional service isdetachment from material activities and attachment to thetranscendental service of the Lord. The process of breaking attachmentto the material world is discussed in the beginning of this chapter.The root of this material existence grows upward. This means that itbegins from the total material substance, from the topmost planet ofthe universe. From there, the whole universe is expanded, with so manybranches, representing the various planetary systems. The fruitsrepresent the results of the living entities' activities, namely,religion, economic development, sense gratification and liberation.Now, there is no ready experience in this world of a tree situated withits branches down and its roots upward, but there is such a thing. Thattree can be found beside a reservoir of water. We can see that thetrees on the bank reflect upon the water with their branches down androots up. In other words, the tree of this material world is only areflection of the real tree of the spiritual world. This reflection ofthe spiritual world is situated on desire, just as a tree's reflectionis situated on water. Desire is the cause of things being situated inthis reflected material light. One who wants to get out of thismaterial existence must know this tree thoroughly through analyticalstudy. Then he can cut off his relationship with it.This tree, being the reflection of the real tree, is an exact replica.Everything is there in the spiritual world. The impersonalists takeBrahma to be the root of this material tree, and from the root,according to Sankhya philosophy, come prakrti, purusa, then the threegunas, then the five gross elements (panca-maha-bhuta), then the tensenses (dasendriya), mind, etc. In this way they divide up the wholematerial world into twenty-four elements. If Brahma is the center ofall manifestations, then this material world is a manifestation of thecenter by 180 degrees, and the other 180 degrees constitute thespiritual world. The material world is the perverted reflection, so thespiritual world must have the same variegatedness, but in reality. Theprakrti is the external energy of the Supreme Lord, and the purusa isthe Supreme Lord Himself, and that is explained in Bhagavad-gita. Sincethis manifestation is material, it is temporary. A reflection istemporary, for it is sometimes seen and sometimes not seen. But theorigin from whence the reflection is reflected is eternal. The materialreflection of the real tree has to be cut off. When it is said that aperson knows the Vedas, it is assumed that he knows how to cut offattachment to this material world. If one knows that process, he
actually knows the Vedas. One who is attracted by the ritualistic
formulas of the Vedas is attracted by the beautiful green leaves of thetree. He does not exactly know the purpose of the Vedas. The purpose ofthe Vedas, as disclosed by the Personality of Godhead Himself, is tocut down this reflected tree and attain the real tree of the spiritualworld.
TEXT 2
adhas cordhvam prasrtas tasya sakha
guna-pravrddha visaya-pravalahadhas ca mulany anusantatanikarmanubandhini manusya-loke
SYNONYMSadhah--downward; ca--and; urdhvam--upward; prasrtah--extended; tasya--
its; sakhah--branches; guna--modes of material nature; pravrddhah--developed; visaya--sense objects; pravalah--twigs; adhah--downward; ca--and; mulani--roots; anusantatani--extended; karma--according to work;anubandhini--bound; manusya-loke--in the world of human society.
TRANSLATIONThe branches of this tree extend downward and upward, nourished by the
three modes of material nature. The twigs are the objects of thesenses. This tree also has roots going down, and these are bound to thefruitive actions of human society.
PURPORTThe description of the banyan tree is further explained here. Its
branches spread in all directions. In the lower parts, there arevariegated manifestations of living entities such as human beings,animals, horses, cows, dogs, cats, etc. These are situated on the lowerparts of the branches, whereas on the upper parts are higher forms ofliving entities: the demigods, Gandharvas and many other higher speciesof life. As a tree is nourished by water, so this tree is nourished bythe three modes of material nature. Sometimes we find that a tract ofland is barren for want of sufficient water, and sometimes a tract isvery green; similarly, where the modes of material nature areproportionately greater in quantity, the different species of life aremanifest in that proportion accordingly.The twigs of the tree are considered to be the sense objects. Bydevelopment of the different modes of nature, we develop differentsenses, and, by the senses, we enjoy different varieties of senseobjects. The source of the senses--the ears, the nose, eyes, etc.--isconsidered to be the upper twigs, tuned to the enjoyment of differentsense objects. The leaves are sound, form, touch--the sense objects.The roots, which are subsidiary, are the by-products of differentvarieties of suffering and sense enjoyment. Thus we develop attachmentand aversion. The tendencies toward piety and impiety are considered tobe the secondary roots, spreading in all directions. The real root isfrom Brahmaloka, and the other roots are in the human planetarysystems. After one enjoys the results of virtuous activities in theupper planetary systems, he comes down to this earth and renews hiskarma, or fruitive activities for promotion. This planet of humanbeings is considered the field of activities.
TEXTS 3-4
na rupam asyeha tathopalabhyate
nanto na cadir na ca sampratisthaasvattham enam su-virudha-mulamasanga-sastrena drdhena chittva
tatah padam tat parimargitavyam
yasmin gata na nivartanti bhuyahtam eva cadyam purusam prapadyeyatah pravrttih prasrta purani
SYNONYMSna--not; rupam--form; asya--of this tree; iha--in this; tatha--also;
upalabhyate--can be perceived; na--never; antah--end; na--never; ca--also; adih--beginning; na--never; ca--also; sampratistha--thefoundation; asvattham--banyan tree; enam--this; su-virudha--strongly;mulam--rooted; asanga-sastrena--by the weapon of detachment; drdhena--strong; chittva--by cutting; tatah--thereafter; padam--situation; tat--that; parimargitavyam--has to be searched out; yasmin--where; gatah--going; na--never; nivartanti--comes back; bhuyah--again; tam--to Him;eva--certainly; ca--also; adyam--original; purusam--the Personality ofGodhead; prapadye--surrender; yatah--from whom; pravrttih--beginning;prasrta--extended; purani--very old.
TRANSLATIONThe real form of this tree cannot be perceived in this world. No one
can understand where it ends, where it begins, or where its foundationis. But with determination one must cut down this tree with the weaponof detachment. So doing, one must seek that place from which, havingonce gone, one never returns, and there surrender to that SupremePersonality of Godhead from whom everything has began and in whomeverything is abiding since time immemorial.
PURPORTIt is now clearly stated that the real form of this banyan tree cannot
be understood in this material world. Since the root is upwards, theextension of the real tree is at the other end. No one can see how farthe tree extends, nor can one see the beginning of this tree. Yet onehas to find out the cause. "I am the son of my father, my father is theson of such and such a person, etc." By searching in this way, onecomes to Brahma, who is generated by the Garbhodakasayi Visnu. Finally,in this way, when one reaches the Supreme Personality of Godhead, thatis the end of research work. One has to search out the origin of thistree, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, through the association ofpersons who are in knowledge of that Supreme Personality of Godhead.Then by understanding one becomes gradually detached from this falsereflection of reality, and by knowledge one can cut off the connectionand actually become situated in the real tree.The word asanga is very important in this connection because theattachment for sense enjoyment and lording it over material nature isvery strong. Therefore one must learn detachment by discussion ofspiritual science based on authoritative scriptures, and one must hearfrom persons who are actually in knowledge. As a result of such
discussion in the association of devotees, one comes to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Then the first thing one must do is surrenderto Him. The description of that place whence going no one returns tothis false reflected tree is given here. The Supreme Personality ofGodhead, Krsna, is the original root from whom everything has emanated.To gain favor of that Personality of Godhead, one has only tosurrender, and this is a result of performing devotional service byhearing, chanting, etc. He is the cause of this extension of thematerial world. This has already been explained by the Lord Himself:aham sarvasya prabhavah, "I am the origin of everything." Therefore toget out of the entanglement of this strong banyan tree of materiallife, one must surrender to Krsna. As soon as one surrenders untoKrsna, he becomes detached automatically from this material extension.
TEXT 5
nirmana-moha jita-sanga-dosa
adhyatma-nitya vinivrtta-kamahdvandvair vimuktah sukha-duhkha-samjnairgacchanty amudhah padam avyayam tat
SYNONYMSnih--without; mana--respect; mohah--illusion; jita--having conquered;
sanga--association; dosah--faulty; adhyatma--spiritual; nityah--eternity; vinivrtta--associated; kamah--lust; dvandvaih--with duality;vimuktah--liberated; sukha-duhkha--happiness and distress; samjnaih--named; gacchanti--attains; amudhah--unbewildered; padam--situation;avyayam--eternal; tat--that.
TRANSLATIONOne who is free from illusion, false prestige, and false association,
who understands the eternal, who is done with material lust and isfreed from the duality of happiness and distress, and who knows how tosurrender unto the Supreme Person, attains to that eternal kingdom.
PURPORTThe surrendering process is described here very nicely. The first
qualification is that one should not be deluded by pride. Because theconditioned soul is puffed up, thinking himself the lord of materialnature, it is very difficult for him to surrender unto the SupremePersonality of Godhead. One should know by the cultivation of realknowledge that he is not lord of material nature; the SupremePersonality of Godhead is the Lord. When one is free from delusioncaused by pride, he can begin the process of surrender. For one who isalways expecting some honor in this material world, it is not possibleto surrender to the Supreme Person. Pride is due to illusion, foralthough one comes here, stays for a brief time and then goes away, hehas the foolish notion that he is the lord of the world. He thus makesall things complicated, and he is always in trouble. The whole worldmoves under this impression. People are considering that the land, thisearth, belongs to human society, and they have divided the land underthe false impression that they are the proprietors. One has to get outof this false notion that human society is the proprietor of thisworld. When one is freed from such a false notion, he becomes free fromall the false associations caused by familial, social and national
affections. These faulty associations bind one to this material world.
After this stage, one has to develop spiritual knowledge. One has tocultivate knowledge of what is actually his own and what is actuallynot his own. And, when one has an understanding of things as they are,he becomes free from all dual conceptions such as happiness anddistress, pleasure and pain. He becomes full in knowledge; then it ispossible for him to surrender to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 6
na tad bhasayate suryo
na sasanko na pavakahyad gatva na nivartantetad dhama paramam mama
SYNONYMSna--not; tat--that; bhasayate--illuminates; suryah--the sun; na--nor;
sasankah--the moon; na--nor; pavakah--fire, electricity; yat--where;gatva--going; na--never; nivartante--comes back; tat dhama--that abode;paramam--supreme; mama--My.
TRANSLATIONThat abode of Mine is not illumined by the sun or moon, nor by
electricity. One who reaches it never returns to this material world.
PURPORTThe spiritual world, the abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Krsna--which is known as Krsnaloka, Goloka Vrndavana--is describedhere. In the spiritual sky there is no need of sunshine, moonshine,fire or electricity, because all the planets are self-luminous. We haveonly one planet in this universe, the sun, which is self-luminous, butall the planets in the spiritual sky are self-luminous. The shiningeffulgence of all those planets (called Vaikunthas) constitutes theshining sky known as the brahmajyoti. Actually, the effulgence isemanating from the planet of Krsna, Goloka Vrndavana. Part of thatshining effulgence is covered by the mahat-tattva, the material world.Other than this, the major portion of that shining sky is full ofspiritual planets, which are called Vaikunthas, chief of which isGoloka Vrndavana.As long as a living entity is in this dark material world, he is inconditional life, but as soon as he reaches the spiritual sky bycutting through the false, perverted tree of this material world, hebecomes liberated. Then there is no chance of his coming back here. Inhis conditional life, the living entity considers himself to be thelord of this material world, but in his liberated state he enters intothe spiritual kingdom and becomes an associate of the Supreme Lord.There he enjoys eternal bliss, eternal life, and full knowledge.One should be captivated by this information. He should desire totransfer himself to that eternal world and extricate himself from thisfalse reflection of reality. For one who is too much attached to thismaterial world, it is very difficult to cut that attachment, but if hetakes to Krsna consciousness, there is a chance of gradually becomingdetached. One has to associate himself with devotees, those who are inKrsna consciousness. One should search out a society dedicated to Krsnaconsciousness and learn how to discharge devotional service. In this
way he can cut off his attachment to the material world. One cannot
become detached from the attraction of the material world simply bydressing himself in saffron cloth. He must become attached to thedevotional service of the Lord. Therefore one should take it veryseriously that devotional service as described in the Twelfth Chapteris the only way to get out of this false representation of the realtree. In Chapter Fourteen the contamination of all kinds of processesby material nature is described. Only devotional service is describedas purely transcendental.The words paramam mama are very important here. Actually every nook andcorner is the property of the Supreme Lord, but the spiritual world isparamam, full of six opulences. The Katha Upanisad (2.2.15) alsoconfirms that in the spiritual world there is no need of sunshine ormoonshine (na tatra suryo bhati na candratarakam), for the wholespiritual sky is illuminated by the internal potency of the SupremeLord. That supreme abode can be achieved only by surrender and by noother means.
TEXT 7
mamaivamso jiva-loke
jiva-bhutah sanatanahmanah-sasthanindriyaniprakrti-sthani karsati
SYNONYMSmama--My; eva--certainly; amsah--fragmental particles; jiva-loke--world
of conditional life; jiva-bhutah--the conditioned living entity;sanatanah--eternal; manah--mind; sasthani--six; indriyani--senses;prakrti--material nature; sthani--situated; karsati--struggling hard.
TRANSLATIONThe living entities in this conditioned world are My eternal fragmental
parts. Due to conditioned life, they are struggling very hard with thesix senses, which include the mind.
PURPORTIn this verse the identity of the living being is clearly given. The
living entity is the fragmental part and parcel of the Supreme Lord--eternally. It is not that he assumes individuality in his conditionallife and in his liberated state becomes one with the Supreme Lord. Heis eternally fragmented. It is clearly said, sanatanah. According tothe Vedic version, the Supreme Lord manifests and expands Himself ininnumerable expansions, of which the primary expansions are calledvisnu-tattva and the secondary expansions are called the livingentities. In other words, the visnu-tattva is the personal expansion,and the living entities are separated expansions. By His personalexpansion, He is manifested in various forms like Lord Rama,Nrsimhadeva, Visnumurti and all the predominating Deities in theVaikuntha planets. The separated expansions, the living entities, areeternally servitors. The personal expansions of the Supreme Personalityof Godhead, the individual identities of the Godhead, are alwayspresent. Similarly, the separated expansions of the living entitieshave their identities. As fragmental parts and parcels of the SupremeLord, the living entities also have fragmental portions of His
qualities, of which independence is one. Every living entity, as an
individual soul, has his personal individuality and a minute form ofindependence. By misuse of that independence one becomes a conditionedsoul, and by proper use of independence he is always liberated. Ineither case, he is qualitatively eternal, as the Supreme Lord is. Inhis liberated state he is freed from this material condition, and he isunder the engagement of transcendental service unto the Lord; in hisconditioned life he is dominated by the material modes of nature, andhe forgets the transcendental loving service of the Lord. As a result,he has to struggle very hard to maintain his existence in the materialworld.The living entities, not only the human beings and the cats and dogs,but even the greater controllers of the material world--Brahma, LordSiva and even Visnu--are all parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord.They are all eternal, not temporary manifestations. The word karsati(struggling or grappling hard) is very significant. The conditionedsoul is bound up, as though shackled by iron chains. He is bound up bythe false ego, and the mind is the chief agent which is driving him inthis material existence. When the mind is in the mode of goodness, hisactivities are good; when the mind is in the mode of passion, hisactivities are troublesome; and when the mind is in the mode ofignorance, he travels in the lower species of life. It is clear,however, in this verse, that the conditioned soul is covered by thematerial body, with the mind and the senses, and when he is liberatedthis material covering perishes, but his spiritual body manifests itsindividual capacity. The following information is there in theMadhyandinayana-sruti: sa va esa brahma-nistha idam sariram martyamatisrjya brahmabhisampadya brahmana pasyati brahmana srnotibrahmanaivedam sarvam anubhavati. It is stated here that when a livingentity gives up this material embodiment and enters into the spiritualworld, he revives his spiritual body, and in his spiritual body he cansee the Supreme Personality of Godhead face to face. He can hear andspeak to Him face to face, and he can understand the SupremePersonality as He is. In smrti also it is understood, vasanti yatrapurusah sarve vaikuntha-murtayah: in the spiritual planets everyonelives in bodies featured like the Supreme Personality of Godhead's. Asfar as bodily construction is concerned, there is no difference betweenthe part and parcel living entities and the expansions of visnu-murti.In other words, at liberation the living entity gets a spiritual bodyby the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.The word mamaivamsah (fragmental parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord)is also very significant. The fragmental portion of the Supreme Lord isnot like some material broken part. We have already understood in theSecond Chapter that the spirit cannot be cut into pieces. This fragmentis not materially conceived. It is not like matter, which can be cutinto pieces and joined together again. That conception is notapplicable here, because the Sanskrit word sanatana (eternal) is used.The fragmental portion is eternal. It is also stated in the beginningof the Second Chapter that (dehino 'smin yatha dehe) in each and everyindividual body the fragmental portion of the Supreme Lord is present.That fragmental portion, when liberated from the bodily entanglement,revives its original spiritual body in the spiritual sky in a spiritualplanet and enjoys association with the Supreme Lord. It is, however,understood here that the living entity, being the fragmental part andparcel of the Supreme Lord, is qualitatively one with the Lord, just asthe parts and parcels of gold are also gold.
TEXT 8
sariram yad avapnoti
yac capy utkramatisvarahgrhitvaitani samyativayur gandhan ivasayat
SYNONYMSsariram--body; yat--as much as; avapnoti--gets; yat--that which; ca--
also; api--virtually; utkramati--gives up; isvarah--the lord of thebody; grhitva--taking; etani--all these; samyati--goes away; vayuh--air; gandhan--smell; iva--like; asayat--from the flower.
TRANSLATIONThe living entity in the material world carries his different
conceptions of life from one body to another as the air carries aromas.
PURPORTHere the living entity is described as isvara, the controller of his
own body. If he likes, he can change his body to a higher grade, and ifhe likes he can move to a lower class. Minute independence is there.The change his body undergoes depends upon him. At the time of death,the consciousness he has created will carry him on to the next type ofbody. If he has made his consciousness like that of a cat or dog, he issure to change to a cat's or dog's body. And, if he has fixed hisconsciousness on godly qualities, he will change into the form of ademigod. And, if he is in Krsna consciousness, he will be transferredto Krsnaloka in the spiritual world and will associate with Krsna. Itis a false claim that after the annihilation of this body everything isfinished. The individual soul is transmigrating from one body toanother, and his present body and present activities are the backgroundof his next body. One gets a different body according to karma, and hehas to quit this body in due course. It is stated here that the subtlebody, which carries the conception of the next body, develops anotherbody in the next life. This process of transmigrating from one body toanother and struggling while in the body is called karsati or strugglefor existence.
TEXT 9
srotram caksuh sparsanam ca
rasanam ghranam eva caadhisthaya manas cayamvisayan upasevate
SYNONYMSsrotram--ears; caksuh--eyes; sparsanam--touch; ca--also; rasanam--
tongue; ghranam--smelling power; eva--also; ca--and; adhisthaya--beingsituated; manah--mind; ca--also; ayam--this; visayan--sense objects;upasevate--enjoys.
TRANSLATION
The living entity, thus taking another gross body, obtains a certain
type of ear, tongue, eye, nose and sense of touch, which are groupedabout the mind. He thus enjoys a particular set of sense objects.
PURPORTIn other words, if the living entity adulterates his consciousness with
the qualities of cats and dogs, in his next life he gets a cat or dogbody and enjoys. Consciousness is originally pure, like water. But ifwe mix water with a certain color, it changes. Similarly, consciousnessis pure, for the spirit soul is pure. But consciousness is changedaccording to the association of the material qualities. Realconsciousness is Krsna consciousness. When, therefore, one is situatedin Krsna consciousness, he is in his pure life. But if hisconsciousness is adulterated by some type of material mentality, in thenext life he gets a corresponding body. He does not necessarily get ahuman body again; he can get the body of a cat, dog, hog, demigod orone of many other forms, for there are 8,400,000 species.
TEXT 10
utkramantam sthitam vapi
bhunjanam va gunanvitamvimudha nanupasyantipasyanti jnana-caksusah
SYNONYMSutkramantam--quitting the body; sthitam--situated in the body; va api--
either; bhunjanam--enjoying; va--or; guna-anvitam--under the spell ofthe modes of material nature; vimudhah--foolish persons; na--never;anupasyanti--can see; pasyanti--one can see; jnana-caksusah--one whohas the eyes of knowledge.
TRANSLATIONThe foolish cannot understand how a living entity can quit his body,
nor can they understand what sort of body he enjoys under the spell ofthe modes of nature. But one whose eyes are trained in knowledge cansee all this.
PURPORTThe word jnana-caksusah is very significant. Without knowledge, one
cannot understand how a living entity leaves his present body, nor whatform of body he is going to take in the next life, nor even why he isliving in a particular type of body. This requires a great amount ofknowledge understood from Bhagavad-gita and similar literatures heardfrom a bona fide spiritual master. One who is trained to perceive allthese things is fortunate. Every living entity is quitting his bodyunder certain circumstances; he is living under certain circumstances,and he is enjoying under certain circumstances under the spell ofmaterial nature. As a result, he is suffering different kinds ofhappiness and distress, under the illusion of sense enjoyment. Personswho are everlastingly fooled by lust and desire lose all power ofunderstand their change of body and their stay in a particular body.They cannot comprehend it. Those who have developed spiritualknowledge, however, can see that the spirit is different from the body
and is changing its body and enjoying in different ways. A person in
such knowledge can understand how the conditioned living entity issuffering in this material existence. Therefore those who are highlydeveloped in Krsna consciousness try their best to give this knowledgeto the people in general, for their conditional life is very muchtroublesome. They should come out of it and be Krsna conscious andliberate themselves to transfer to the spiritual world.
TEXT 11
yatanto yoginas cainam
pasyanty atmany avasthitamyatanto 'py akrtatmanonainam pasyanty acetasah
SYNONYMSyatantah--endeavoring; yoginah--transcendentalists; ca--also; enam--
this; pasyanti--can see; atmani--in the self; avasthitam--situated;yatantah--although endeavoring; api--although; akrta-atmanah--withoutself-realization; na--does not; enam--this; pasyanti--can see;acetasah--undeveloped mind.
TRANSLATIONThe endeavoring transcendentalist, who is situated in self-realization,
can see all this clearly. But those who are not situated in self-realization cannot see what is taking place, though they may try to.
PURPORTThere are many transcendentalists on the path of spiritual self-
realization, but one who is not situated in self-realization cannot seehow things are changing in the body of the living entity. The wordyoginah is significant in this connection. In the present day there aremany so-called yogis, and there are many so-called associations ofyogis, but they are actually blind in the matter of self-realization.They are simply addicted to some sort of gymnastic exercise and aresatisfied if the body is well-built and healthy. They have no otherinformation. They are called yatanto 'py akrtatmanah. Even though theyare endeavoring in a so-called yoga system, they are not self-realized.Such people cannot understand the process of the transmigration of thesoul. Only those who are actually in the yoga system and have realizedthe self, the world, and the Supreme Lord, in other words, the bhakti-yogis, those engaged in pure devotional service in Krsna consciousness,can understand how things are taking place.
TEXT 12
yad aditya-gatam tejo
jagad bhasayate 'khilamyac candramasi yac cagnautat tejo viddhi mamakam
SYNONYMSyat--that which; aditya-gatam--in the sunshine; tejah--splendor; jagat-
-the whole world; bhasayate--illuminates; akhilam--entirely; yat--that
which; candramasi--in the moon; yat--that which; ca--also; agnau--in
the fire; tat--that; tejah--splendor; viddhi--understand; mamakam--fromMe.
TRANSLATIONThe splendor of the sun, which dissipates the darkness of this whole
world, comes from Me. And the splendor of the moon and the splendor offire are also from Me.
PURPORTThe unintelligent cannot understand how things are taking place. The
beginning of knowledge can be established by understanding what theLord explains here. Everyone sees the sun, moon, fire and electricity.One should simply try to understand that the splendor of the sun, thesplendor of the moon, and the splendor of electricity or fire arecoming from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In such a conception oflife, the beginning of Krsna consciousness, lies a great deal ofadvancement for the conditioned soul in this material world. The livingentities are essentially the parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord, andHe is giving herewith the hint how they can come back to Godhead, backto home.From this verse we can understand that the sun is illuminating thewhole solar system. There are different universes and solar systems,and there are different suns, moons and planets also, but in eachuniverse there is only one sun. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (10.21), themoon is one of the stars (naksatranam aham sasi). Sunlight is due tothe spiritual effulgence in the spiritual sky of the Supreme Lord. Withthe rise of the sun, the activities of human beings are set up. Theyset fire to prepare their foodstuff, they set fire to start thefactories, etc. So many things are done with the help of fire.Therefore sunrise, fire and moonlight are so pleasing to the livingentities. Without their help no living entity can live. So if one canunderstand that the light and splendor of the sun, moon and fire areemanating from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, then one'sKrsna consciousness will begin. By the moonshine, all the vegetablesare nourished. The moonshine is so pleasing that people can easilyunderstand that they are living by the mercy of the Supreme Personalityof Godhead Krsna. Without His mercy there cannot be sun, without Hismercy there cannot be moon, and without His mercy there cannot be fire,and without the help of sun, moon and fire, no one can live. These aresome thoughts to provoke Krsna consciousness in the conditioned soul.
TEXT 13
gam avisya ca bhutani
dharayamy aham ojasapusnami causadhih sarvahsomo bhutva rasatmakah
SYNONYMSgam--the planets; avisya--entering; ca--also; bhutani--living entities;
dharayami--sustaining; aham--I; ojasa--by My energy; pusnami--nourishing; ca--and; ausadhih--all vegetables; sarvah--all; somah--themoon; bhutva--becoming; rasa-atmakah--supplying the juice.
TRANSLATION
I enter into each planet, and by My energy they stay in orbit. I become
the moon and thereby supply the juice of life to all vegetables.
PURPORTIt is understood that all the planets are floating in the air only by
the energy of the Lord. The Lord enters into every atom, every planet,and every living being. That is discussed in the Brahma-samhita. It issaid there that one plenary portion of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, Paramatma, enters into the planets, the universe, the livingentity, and even into the atom. So due to His entrance, everything isappropriately manifested. When the spirit soul is there, a living mancan float on the water, but when the living spark is out of the bodyand the body is dead, it sinks. Of course when it is decomposed itfloats just like straw and other things, but as soon as the man isdead, he at once sinks in the water. Similarly, all these planets arefloating in space, and this is due to the entrance of the supremeenergy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. His energy is sustainingeach planet, just like a handful of dust. If someone holds a handful ofdust, there is no possibility of the dust's falling, but if one throwsit in the air, it will fall down. Similarly, these planets, which arefloating in the air, are actually held in the fist of the universalform of the Supreme Lord. By His strength and energy, all moving andunmoving things stay in their place. It is said in the Vedic hymns thatbecause of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the sun is shining andthe planets are steadily moving. Were it not for Him, all the planetswould scatter, like dust in air, and perish. Similarly, it is due tothe Supreme Personality of Godhead that the moon nourishes allvegetables. Due to the moon's influence, the vegetables becomedelicious. Without the moonshine, the vegetables can neither grow nortaste succulent. Human society is working, living comfortably andenjoying food due to the supply from the Supreme Lord. Otherwise,mankind could not survive. The word rasatmakah is very significant.Everything becomes palatable by the agency of the Supreme Lord throughthe influence of the moon.
TEXT 14
aham vaisvanaro bhutva
praninam deham asritahpranapana-samayuktahpacamy annam catur-vidham
SYNONYMSaham--I; vaisvanarah--by My plenary portion as the digesting fire;
bhutva--becoming; praninam--of all living entities; deham--body;asritah--situated; prana--outgoing air; apana--down-going air;samayuktah--keep balance; pacami--digest; annam--foodstuff; catuh-vidham--four kinds of.
TRANSLATIONI am the fire of digestion in every living body, and I am the air of
life, outgoing and incoming, by which I digest the four kinds offoodstuff.
PURPORT
According to Ayur-vedic sastra, we understand that there is a fire in
the stomach which digests all food sent there. When the fire is notblazing, there is no hunger, and when the fire is in order we becomehungry. Sometimes when the fire is not going nicely, treatment isrequired. In any case, this fire is representative of the SupremePersonality of Godhead. Vedic mantras (Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 5.9.1)also confirm that the Supreme Lord or Brahman is situated in the formof fire within the stomach and is digesting all kinds of foodstuff(ayam agnir vaisvanaro yo 'yam antah puruse yenedam annam pacyate).Therefore since He is helping the digestion of all kinds of foodstuff,the living entity is not independent in the eating process. Unless theSupreme Lord helps him in digesting, there is no possibility of eating.He thus produces and digests foodstuff, and, by His grace, we areenjoying life. In the Vedanta-sutra (1.2.27) this is also confirmed.Sabdadibhyo 'ntah pratisthanac ca: the Lord is situated within thesound and within the body, within the air and even within the stomachas the digestive force. There are four kinds of foodstuff, some areswallowed, some are chewed, some are licked up, and some are sucked,and He is the digestive force for all of them.
TEXT 15
sarvasya caham hrdi sannivisto
mattah smrtir jnanam apohanam cavedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyovedanta-krd veda-vid eva caham
SYNONYMSsarvasya--of all living beings; ca--and; aham--I; hrdi--in the heart;
sannivistah--being situated; mattah--from Me; smrtih--remembrance;jnanam--knowledge; apohanam ca--and forgetfulness; vedaih--by theVedas; ca--also; sarvaih--all; aham--I am; eva--certainly; vedyah--knowable; vedanta-krt--the compiler of the Vedanta; veda-vit--theknower of the Vedas; eva--certainly; ca--and; aham--I.
TRANSLATIONI am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance,
knowledge and forgetfulness. By all the Vedas I am to be known; indeedI am the compiler of Vedanta, and I am the knower of the Vedas.
PURPORTThe Supreme Lord is situated as Paramatma in everyone's heart, and it
is from Him that all activities are initiated. The living entityforgets everything of his past life, but he has to act according to thedirection of the Supreme Lord, who is witness to all his work.Therefore he begins his work according to his past deeds. Requiredknowledge is supplied to him, and remembrance is given to him, and heforgets, also, about his past life. Thus, the Lord is not only all-pervading; He is also localized in every individual heart. He awardsthe different fruitive results. He is not only worshipable as theimpersonal Brahman, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and thelocalized Paramatma, but as the form of the incarnation of the Vedas as
well. The Vedas give the right direction to the people so that they can
properly mold their lives and come back to Godhead, back to home. TheVedas offer knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, andKrsna in His incarnation as Vyasadeva is the compiler of the Vedanta-sutra. The commentation on the Vedanta-sutra by Vyasadeva in theSrimad-Bhagavatam gives the real understanding of Vedanta-sutra. TheSupreme Lord is so full that for the deliverance of the conditionedsoul He is the supplier and digester of foodstuff, the witness of hisactivity, the giver of knowledge in the form of Vedas and as theSupreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, the teacher of the Bhagavad-gita. He is worshipable by the conditioned soul. Thus God is all-good;God is all-merciful.Antah-pravistah sasta jananam. The living entity forgets as soon as hequits his present body, but he begins his work again, initiated by theSupreme Lord. Although he forgets, the Lord gives him the intelligenceto renew his work where he ended in his last life. So not only does aliving entity enjoy or suffer in this world according to the dictationfrom the Supreme Lord situated locally in the heart, but he receivesthe opportunity to understand the Vedas from Him. If one is serious tounderstand the Vedic knowledge, then Krsna gives the requiredintelligence. Why does He present the Vedic knowledge forunderstanding? Because a living entity individually needs to understandKrsna. Vedic literature confirms this: yo 'sau sarvair vedair giyate.In all Vedic literature, beginning from the four Vedas, Vedanta-sutraand the Upanisads and Puranas, the glories of the Supreme Lord arecelebrated. By performing Vedic rituals, discussing the Vedicphilosophy and worshiping the Lord in devotional service, He isattained. Therefore the purpose of the Vedas is to understand Krsna.The Vedas give us direction to understand Krsna and the process ofunderstanding. The ultimate goal is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.Vedanta-sutra (1.1.4) confirms this in the following words: tat tusamanvayat. One can attain perfection by understanding Vedicliterature, and one can understand his relationship with the SupremePersonality of Godhead by performing the different processes. Thus onecan approach Him and at the end one can attain the supreme goal, who isno other than the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In this verse,however, the purpose of the Vedas, the understanding of the Vedas, andthe goal of the Vedas are clearly defined.
TEXT 16
dvav imau purusau loke
ksaras caksara eva caksarah sarvani bhutanikuta-stho 'ksara ucyate
SYNONYMSdvau--two; imau--in this (world); purusau--living entities; loke--in
the world; ksarah--fallible; ca--and; aksarah--infallible; eva--certainly; ca--and; ksarah--the fallible; sarvani--all; bhutani--livingentities; kuta-sthah--in oneness; aksarah--infallible; ucyate--is said.
TRANSLATIONThere are two classes of beings, the fallible and the infallible. In
the material world every entity is fallible, and in the spiritual worldevery entity is called infallible.
PURPORT
As already explained, the Lord in His incarnation as Vyasadeva compiled
the Vedanta-sutra. Here the Lord is giving, in summary, the contents ofthe Vedanta-sutra. He says that the living entities, who areinnumerable, can be divided into two classes--the fallible and theinfallible. The living entities are eternally separated parts andparcels of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When they are in contactwith the material world, they are called jiva-bhuta, and the Sanskritwords given here, ksarah sarvani bhutani, mean that they are fallible.Those who are in oneness with the Supreme Personality of Godhead,however, are called infallible. Oneness does not mean that they have noindividuality, but that there is no disunity. They are all agreeable tothe purpose of the creation. Of course, in the spiritual world, thereis no such thing as creation, but since the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, as stated in the Vedanta-sutra, is the source of allemanations, that conception is explained.According to the statement of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, LordKrsna, there are two classes of men. The Vedas give evidence of this,so there is no doubt about it. The living entities, who are strugglingin this world with the mind and five senses, have their material bodieswhich are changing as long as the living entities are conditioned.One's body changes due to contact with matter; matter is changing, sothe living entity appears to be changing. But in the spiritual worldthe body is not made of matter; therefore there is no change. In thematerial world the living entity undergoes six changes--birth, growth,duration, reproduction, then dwindling and vanishing. These are thechanges of the material body. But in the spiritual world the body doesnot change; there is no old age, there is no birth, there is no death.There all exists in oneness. It is more clearly explained as ksarahsarvani bhutani: any living entity who has come in contact with matter,beginning from the first created being, Brahma, down to a small ant, ischanging its body; therefore they are all fallible. In the spiritualworld, however, they are always liberated in oneness.
TEXT 17
uttamah purusas tv anyah
paramatmety udahrtahyo loka-trayam avisyabibharty avyaya isvarah
SYNONYMSuttamah--the best; purusah--personality; tu--but; anyah--another;
parama--the supreme; atma--self; iti--thus; udahrtah--is said; yah--onewho; loka--of the universe; trayam--the three divisions; avisya--entering; bibharti--maintaining; avyayah--inexhaustible; isvarah--theLord.
TRANSLATIONBesides these two, there is the greatest living personality, the Lord
Himself, who has entered into these worlds and is maintaining them.
PURPORT
This verse is very nicely expressed in the Katha Upanisad (2.2.13) and
Svetasvatara Upanisad (6.13). It is clearly stated there that above theinnumerable living entities, some of whom are conditioned and some ofwhom are liberated, there is the Supreme Personality who is Paramatma.The Upanisadic verse runs as follows: nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam.The purport is that amongst all the living entities, both conditionedand liberated, there is one supreme living personality, the SupremePersonality of Godhead, who maintains them and gives them all facilityof enjoyment according to different work. That Supreme Personality ofGodhead is situated in everyone's heart as Paramatma. A wise man whocan understand Him is eligible to attain the perfect peace, not others.It is incorrect to think of the Supreme Lord and the living entities asbeing on the same level or equal in all respects. There is always thequestion of superiority and inferiority in their personalities. Thisparticular word uttama is very significant. No one can surpass theSupreme Personality of Godhead. Loke is also significant because in thepaurusa, a Vedic literature, it is stated, lokyate vedartho 'nena. ThisSupreme Lord in His localized aspect as Paramatma explains the purposeof the Vedas. The following verse also appears in the Vedas (ChandogyaUpanisad 8.12.3):
tavad esa samprasado 'smac
charirat samutthaya paramjyoti-rupam sampadya svenarupenabhinispadyate sa uttamah purusah.
"The Supersoul coming out of the body enters the impersonal
brahmajyoti; then in His form He remains in His spiritual identity.That Supreme is called the Supreme Personality." This means that theSupreme Personality is exhibiting and diffusing His spiritualeffulgence, which is the ultimate illumination. That SupremePersonality also has a localized aspect as Paramatma. By incarnatingHimself as the son of Satyavati and Parasara, He explains the Vedicknowledge as Vyasadeva.
TEXT 18
yasmat ksaram atito 'ham
aksarad api cottamahato 'smi loke vede caprathitah purusottamah
SYNONYMSyasmat--because; ksaram--the fallible; atitah--transcendental; aham--I;
aksarat--from the infallible; api--better than that; ca--and; uttamah--the best; atah--therefore; asmi--I am; loke--in the world; vede--in theVedic literature; ca--and; prathitah--celebrated; purusa-uttamah--asthe Supreme Personality.
TRANSLATIONBecause I am transcendental, beyond both the fallible and the
infallible, and because I am the greatest, I am celebrated both in theworld and in the Vedas as that Supreme Person.
PURPORT
No one can surpass the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna--neither
the conditioned soul nor the liberated soul. He is, therefore, thegreatest of personalities. Now it is clear here that the livingentities and the Supreme Personality of Godhead are individuals. Thedifference is that the living entities, either in the conditioned stateor in the liberated state, cannot surpass in quantity the inconceivablepotencies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 19
yo mam evam asammudho
janati purusottamamsa sarva-vid bhajati mamsarva-bhavena bharata
SYNONYMSyah--anyone; mam--unto Me; evam--certainly; asammudhah--without a
doubt; janati--knows; purusa-uttamam--the Supreme Personality ofGodhead; sah--he; sarva-vit--knower of everything; bhajati--rendersdevotional service; mam--unto Me; sarva-bhavena--in all respects;bharata--O son of Bharata.
TRANSLATIONWhoever knows Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, without
doubting, is to be understood as the knower of everything, and Hetherefore engages himself in full devotional service, O son of Bharata.
PURPORTThere are many philosophical speculations about the constitutional
position of the living entities and the Supreme Absolute Truth. Now inthis verse the Supreme Personality of Godhead clearly explains thatanyone who knows Lord Krsna as the Supreme Person is actually theknower of everything. The imperfect knower goes on simply speculatingabout the Absolute Truth, but the perfect knower, without wasting hisvaluable time, engages directly in Krsna consciousness, the devotionalservice of the Supreme Lord. Throughout the whole of Bhagavad-gita,this fact is being stressed at every step. And still there are so manystubborn commentators on Bhagavad-gita who consider the SupremeAbsolute Truth and the living entities to be one and the same.The Vedic knowledge is called sruti, learning by aural reception. Oneshould actually receive the Vedic messages from authorities like Krsnaand His representatives. Here Krsna distinguishes everything verynicely, and one should hear from this source. Simply to hear like thehogs is not sufficient; one must be able to understand from theauthorities. It is not that one should simply speculate academically.One should submissively hear from Bhagavad-gita that these livingentities are always subordinate to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.Anyone who is able to understand this, according to the SupremePersonality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, knows the purpose of the Vedas; noone else knows the purpose of the Vedas.The word bhajati is very significant. In many places the word bhajatiis expressed in relationship with the service of the Supreme Lord. If aperson is engaged in full Krsna consciousness in devotional service ofthe Lord, it is to be understood that he has understood all the Vedicknowledge. In the Vaisnava parampara it is said that if one is engaged
in the devotional service of Krsna, then there is no need for any other
spiritual process for understanding the Supreme Absolute Truth. He hasalready come to the point, because he is engaged in the devotionalservice of the Lord. He has ended all preliminary processes ofunderstanding; similarly, if anyone, after speculating for hundreds ofthousands of lives, does not come to the point that Krsna is theSupreme Personality of Godhead and that one has to surrender there, allhis speculation for so many years and lives is a useless waste of time.
TEXT 20
iti guhyatamam sastram
idam uktam mayanaghaetad buddhva buddhiman syatkrta-krtyas ca bharata
SYNONYMSiti--thus; guhya-tamam--the most confidential; sastram--revealed
scripture; idam--this; uktam--disclosed; maya--by Me; anagha--O sinlessone; etat--this; buddhva--understanding; buddhi-man--intelligent; syat--one becomes; krta-krtyah--the most perfect; ca--and; bharata--O son ofBharata.
TRANSLATIONThis is the most confidential part of the Vedic scriptures, O sinless
one, and it is disclosed now by Me. Whoever understands this willbecome wise, and his endeavors will know perfection.
PURPORTThe Lord clearly explains here that this is the substance of all
revealed scriptures. And one should understand this as it is given bythe Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus one will become intelligentand perfect in transcendental knowledge. In other words, byunderstanding this philosophy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead andengaging in His transcendental service, everyone can become freed fromall contaminations of the modes of material nature. Devotional serviceis a process of spiritual understanding. Wherever devotional serviceexists, the material contamination cannot coexist. Devotional serviceto the Lord and the Lord Himself are one and the same because they arespiritual--the internal energy of the Supreme Lord. The Lord is said tobe the sun, and ignorance is called darkness. Where the sun is present,there is no question of darkness. Therefore, whenever devotionalservice is present under the proper guidance of a bona fide spiritualmaster, there is no question of ignorance.Everyone must take to this consciousness of Krsna and engage indevotional service to become intelligent and purified. Unless one comesto this position of understanding Krsna and engages in devotionalservice, however intelligent he may be in the estimation of some commonman, he is not perfectly intelligent.The word anagha, by which Arjuna is addressed, is significant. Anagha,"O sinless one," means that unless one is free from all sinfulreactions it is very difficult to understand Krsna. One has to becomefree from all contamination, all sinful activities; then he canunderstand. But devotional service is so pure and potent that once one
