essence of Gita, if one is fortunate to understand the Gita--especially
these middle six chapters--in the association of devotees, then hislife at once becomes glorified beyond all penances, sacrifices,charities, speculations, etc. One should hear the Gita from the devoteebecause at the beginning of the Fourth Chapter it is stated that theGita can only be perfectly understood by devotees. Hearing the Gitafrom devotees, not from mental speculators, is called faith. Throughassociation of devotees, one is placed in devotional service, and bythis service Krsna's activities, form, pastimes, name, etc., becomeclear, and all misgivings are dispelled. Then once doubts are removed,the study of the Gita becomes extremely pleasurable, and one develops ataste and feeling for Krsna consciousness. In the advanced stage, onefalls completely in love with Krsna, and that is the beginning of thehighest perfectional stage of life which prepares the devotee'stransferral to Krsna's abode in the spiritual sky, Goloka Vrndavana,where the devotee enters into eternal happiness.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Eighth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Attaining the Supreme.
Chapter 9
The Most Confidential Knowledge
TEXT 1
sri-bhagavan uvaca
idam tu te guhyatamampravaksyamy anasuyavejnanam vijnana-sahitamyaj jnatva moksyase 'subhat
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; idam--
this; tu--but; te--unto you; guhya-tamam--the most confidential;pravaksyami--I am speaking; anasuyave--to the nonenvious; jnanam--knowledge; vijnana--realized knowledge; sahitam--with; yat--which;jnatva--knowing; moksyase--be released; asubhat--from this miserablematerial existence.
TRANSLATIONThe Supreme Lord said: My dear Arjuna, because you are never envious of
Me, I shall impart to you this most secret wisdom, knowing which youshall be relieved of the miseries of material existence.
PURPORTAs a devotee hears more and more about the Supreme Lord, he becomes
enlightened. This hearing process is recommended in the Srimad-Bhagavatam: "The messages of the Supreme Personality of Godhead arefull of potencies, and these potencies can be realized if topicsregarding the Supreme Godhead are discussed amongst devotees. Thiscannot be achieved by the association of mental speculators or academicscholars, for it is realized knowledge."The devotees are constantly engaged in the Supreme Lord's service. TheLord understands the mentality and sincerity of a particular livingentity who is engaged in Krsna consciousness and gives him the
intelligence to understand the science of Krsna in the association of
the devotees. Discussion of Krsna is very potent, and if a fortunateperson has such association and tries to assimilate the knowledge, thenhe will surely make advancement toward spiritual realization. LordKrsna, in order to encourage Arjuna to higher and higher elevation inHis potent service, describes in this Ninth Chapter matters moreconfidential than any He has already disclosed.The very beginning of Bhagavad-gita, the First Chapter, is more or lessan introduction to the rest of the book; and in the Second and Thirdchapters, the spiritual knowledge described is called confidential.Topics discussed in the Seventh and Eighth chapters are specificallyrelated to devotional service, and because they bring enlightenment inKrsna consciousness, they are called more confidential. But the matterswhich are described in the Ninth Chapter deal with unalloyed, puredevotion. Therefore this is called the most confidential. One who issituated in the most confidential knowledge of Krsna is naturallytranscendental; he therefore has no material pangs, although he is inthe material world. In the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu it is said thatalthough one who has a sincere desire to render loving service to theSupreme Lord is situated in the conditional state of materialexistence, he is to be considered liberated. Similarly, we shall findin the Bhagavad-gita, Tenth Chapter, that anyone who is engaged in thatway is a liberated person.Now this first verse has specific significance. Knowledge (idam jnanam)refers to pure devotional service, which consists of nine differentactivities: hearing, chanting, remembering, serving, worshiping,praying, obeying, maintaining friendship and surrendering everything.By the practice of these nine elements of devotional service one iselevated to spiritual consciousness, Krsna consciousness. At the timewhen one's heart is cleared of the material contamination, one canunderstand this science of Krsna. Simply to understand that a livingentity is not material is not sufficient. That may be the beginning ofspiritual realization but one should recognize the difference betweenactivities of the body and spiritual activities by which oneunderstands that he is not the body.In the Seventh Chapter we have already discussed the opulent potency ofthe Supreme Personality of Godhead, His different energies, theinferior and superior natures, and all this material manifestation. Nowin Chapters Nine and Ten the glories of the Lord will be delineated.The Sanskrit word anasuyave in this verse is also very significant.Generally the commentators, even if they are highly scholarly, are allenvious of Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Even the mosterudite scholars write on Bhagavad-gita very inaccurately. Because theyare envious of Krsna, their commentaries are useless. The commentariesgiven by devotees of the Lord are bona fide. No one can explainBhagavad-gita, or give perfect knowledge of Krsna if he is envious. Onewho criticizes the character of Krsna without knowing Him is a fool. Sosuch commentaries should be very carefully avoided. For one whounderstands that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the pureand transcendental Personality, these chapters will be very beneficial.
TEXT 2
raja-vidya raja-guhyam
pavitram idam uttamampratyaksavagamam dharmyamsu-sukham kartum avyayam
SYNONYMS
raja-vidya--the king of education; raja-guhyam--the king of
confidential knowledge; pavitram--the purest; idam--this; uttamam--transcendental; pratyaksa--directly experienced; avagamam--understood;dharmyam--the principle of religion; su-sukham--very happy; kartum--toexecute; avyayam--everlasting.
TRANSLATIONThis knowledge is the king of education, the most secret of all
secrets. It is the purest knowledge, and because it gives directperception of the self by realization, it is the perfection ofreligion. It is everlasting, and it is joyfully performed.
PURPORTThis chapter of Bhagavad-gita is called the king of education because
it is the essence of all doctrines and philosophies explained before.There are seven principal philosophers in India, Gautama, Kanada,Kapila, Yajnavalkya, Sandilya, Vaisvanara, and, finally, Vyasadeva, theauthor of the Vedanta-sutra. So there is no dearth of knowledge in thefield of philosophy or transcendental knowledge. Now the Lord says thatthis Ninth Chapter is the king of all such knowledge, the essence ofall knowledge that can be derived from the study of the Vedas anddifferent kinds of philosophy. It is the most confidential becauseconfidential or transcendental knowledge involves understanding thedifference between the soul and the body. And the king of allconfidential knowledge culminates in devotional service.Generally, people are not educated in this confidential knowledge; theyare educated in external knowledge. As far as ordinary education isconcerned, people are involved with so many departments: politics,sociology, physics, chemistry, mathematics, astronomy, engineering,etc. There are so many departments of knowledge all over the world andmany huge universities, but there is, unfortunately, no university oreducational institution where the science of the spirit soul isinstructed. Yet the soul is the most important part of this body;without the presence of the soul, the body has no value. Still peopleare placing great stress on the bodily necessities of life, not caringfor the vital soul.The Bhagavad-gita, especially from the Second Chapter on, stresses theimportance of the soul. In the very beginning, the Lord says that thisbody is perishable and that the soul is not perishable. That is aconfidential part of knowledge: simply knowing that the spirit soul isdifferent from this body and that its nature is immutable,indestructible and eternal. But that gives no positive informationabout the soul. Sometimes people are under the impression that the soulis different from the body and that when the body is finished, or oneis liberated from the body, the soul remains in a void and becomesimpersonal. But actually that is not the fact. How can the soul, whichis so active within this body, be inactive after being liberated fromthe body? It is always active. If it is eternal, then it is eternallyactive, and its activities in the spiritual kingdom are the mostconfidential part of spiritual knowledge. These activities of thespirit soul are therefore indicated here as constituting the king ofall knowledge, the most confidential part of all knowledge.
This knowledge is the purest form of all activities, as is explained in
Vedic literature. In the Padma Purana, man's sinful activities havebeen analyzed and are shown to be the results of sin after sin. Thosewho are engaged in fruitive activities are entangled in differentstages and forms of sinful reactions. For instance, when the seed of aparticular tree is sown, the tree does not appear immediately to grow;it takes some time. It is first a small, sprouting plant, then itassumes the form of a tree, then it flowers, bears fruit, and, when itis complete, the flowers and fruits are enjoyed by persons who havesown the seed of the tree. Similarly, a man performs a sinful act, andlike a seed it takes time to fructify. There are different stages. Thesinful action may have already stopped within the individual, but theresults or the fruit of that sinful action are still enjoyed. There aresins which are still in the form of a seed, and there are others whichare already fructified and are giving us fruit, which we are enjoyingas distress and painAs explained in the twenty-eighth verse of the Seventh Chapter, aperson who has completely ended the reactions of all sinful activitiesand who is fully engaged in pious activities, being freed from theduality of this material world, becomes engaged in devotional serviceto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. In other words, those whoare actually engaged in the devotional service of the Supreme Lord arealready freed from all reactions. For those who are engaged in thedevotional service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, all sinfulreactions, whether fructified, in the stock, or in the form of a seed,gradually vanish. Therefore the purifying potency of devotional serviceis very strong, and it is called pavitram uttamam, the purest. Uttamameans transcendental. Tamas means this material world or darkness, anduttama means that which is transcendental to material activities.Devotional activities are never to be considered material, althoughsometimes it appears that devotees are engaged just like ordinary men.One who can see and is familiar with devotional service, however, willknow that they are not material activities. They are all spiritual anddevotional, uncontaminated by the material modes of nature.It is said that the execution of devotional service is so perfect thatone can perceive the results directly. This direct result is actuallyperceived, and we have practical experience that any person who ischanting the holy names of Krsna (Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna,Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare) in course oftime feels some transcendental pleasure and very quickly becomespurified of all material contamination. This is actually seen.Furthermore, if one engages not only in hearing but in trying tobroadcast the message of devotional activities as well, or if heengages himself in helping the missionary activities of Krsnaconsciousness, he gradually feels spiritual progress. This advancementin spiritual life does not depend on any kind of previous education orqualification. The method itself is so pure that by simply engaging init one becomes pure.In the Vedanta-sutra (3.2.26) this is also described in the followingwords: prakasas ca karmany abhyasat. "Devotional service is so potentthat simply by engaging in the activities of devotional service onebecomes enlightened without a doubt." Narada, who happened to be theson of a maidservant, had no education, nor was he born into a highfamily. But when his mother was engaged in serving great devotees,Narada also became engaged, and sometimes, in the absence of hismother, he would serve the great devotees himself. Narada personallysays, "Once only, by their permission, I took the remnants of theirfood, and by so doing all my sins were at once eradicated. Thus being
engaged, I became purified in heart, and at that time the very nature
of the transcendentalist became attractive to me."(Bhag 1.5.25) Naradatells his disciple Vyasadeva that in a previous life he was engaged asa boy servant of purified devotees during the four months of their stayand that he was intimately associating with them. Sometimes those sagesleft remnants of food on their dishes, and the boy, who would washtheir dishes, wanted to taste the remnants. So he asked the greatdevotees whether he could eat them, and they gave their permission.Narada then ate those remnants and consequently became freed from allsinful reactions. As he went on eating, he gradually became as pure-hearted as the sages, and he gradually developed the same taste. Thegreat devotees relished the taste of unceasing devotional service ofthe Lord, hearing, chanting, etc., and by developing the same taste,Narada wanted also to hear and chant the glories of the Lord. Thus byassociating with the sages, he developed a great desire for devotionalservice. Therefore, he quotes from the Vedanta-sutra (prakasas cakarmany abhyasat): if one is engaged simply in the acts of devotionalservice, everything is revealed to him automatically, and he canunderstand. This is called pratyaksa, directly perceived.Narada was actually a son of a maidservant. He had no opportunity to goto school. He was simply assisting his mother, and fortunately hismother rendered some service to the devotees. The child Narada also gotthe opportunity and simply by association achieved the highest goal ofall religions, devotional service. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is saidthat religious people generally do not know that the highest perfectionof religion is the attainment of the stage of devotional service.Generally Vedic knowledge is required for understanding the path ofself-realization. But here, although he was not educated in the Vedicprinciples, Narada acquired the highest results of Vedic study. Thisprocess is so potent that even without performing the religious processregularly, one can be raised to the highest perfection. How is thispossible? This is also confirmed in Vedic literature: acaryavan purusoveda. One who is in association with great acaryas, even if he is noteducated or has not studied the Vedas, can become familiar with all theknowledge necessary for realization.The process of devotional service is a very happy one. Why? Devotionalservice consists of sravanam kirtanam visnoh, so one can simply hearthe chanting of the glories of the Lord or can attend philosophicallectures on transcendental knowledge given by authorized acaryas.Simply by sitting, one can learn; then one can eat the remnants of thefood offered to God, nice palatable dishes. In every state devotionalservice is joyful. One can execute devotional service even in the mostpoverty-stricken condition. The Lord says, patram puspam phalam: He isready to accept from the devotee any kind of offering, never mind what.Even a leaf, a flower, a bit of fruit, or a little water, which areavailable in every part of the world, can be offered by any person,regardless of social position, and will be accepted if offered withlove. There are many instances in history. Simply by tasting the tulasileaves offered to the lotus feet of the Lord, great sages like Sanat-kumara became great devotees. Therefore the devotional process is verynice, and it can be executed in a happy mood. God accepts only the lovewith which things are offered to Him.It is said here that this devotional service is eternally existing. Itis not as the Mayavadi philosophers claim. They sometimes take to so-called devotional service, and as long as they are not liberated theycontinue their devotional service, but at the end, when they becomeliberated, they "become one with God." Such temporary time-servingdevotional service is not accepted as pure devotional service. Actual
devotional service continues even after liberation. When the devotee
goes to the spiritual planet in the kingdom of God, he is also engagedthere in serving the Supreme Lord. He does not try to become one withthe Supreme Lord.As it will be seen, actual devotional service begins after liberation.So in Bhagavad-gita it is said, brahma-bhuta, After being liberated, orbeing situated in the Brahman position, one's devotional servicebegins. By executing devotional service, one can understand the SupremeLord. No one can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead byexecuting karma-yoga, jnana or astanga-yoga or any other yogaindependently. Without coming to the stage of devotional service, onecannot understand what is the Personality of Godhead. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is also confirmed that when one becomes purified byexecuting the process of devotional service, especially by hearingSrimad-Bhagavatam or Bhagavad-gita from realized souls, then he canunderstand the science of Krsna, or the science of God. Evam prasanna-manaso bhagavad-bhakti yogatah. When one's heart is cleared of allnonsense, then one can understand what God is. Thus the process ofdevotional service, of Krsna consciousness, is the king of alleducation and the king of all confidential knowledge. It is the purestform of religion, and it can be executed joyfully without difficulty.Therefore one should adopt it.
TEXT 3
asraddadhanah purusa
dharmasyasya parantapaaprapya mam nivartantemrtyu-samsara-vartmani
SYNONYMSasraddadhanah--those who are faithless; purusah--such persons;
dharmasya--of this process of religion; asya--of it; parantapa--Okiller of the enemies; aprapya--without obtaining; mam--Me; nivartante--come back; mrtyu--death; samsara--material existence; vartmani--on thepath of.
TRANSLATIONThose who are not faithful on the path of devotional service cannot
attain Me, O conqueror of foes, but return to birth and death in thismaterial world.
PURPORTThe faithless cannot accomplish this process of devotional service;
that is the purport of this verse. Faith is created by association withdevotees. Unfortunate people, even after hearing all the evidence ofVedic literature from great personalities, still have no faith in God.They are hesitant and cannot stay fixed in the devotional service ofthe Lord. Thus faith is a most important factor for progress in Krsnaconsciousness. In the Caitanya-caritamrta it is said that one shouldhave complete conviction that simply by serving the Supreme Lord SriKrsna he can achieve all perfection. That is called real faith. In theSrimad-Bhagavatam (4.31.14) it is stated that by giving water to theroot of a tree, its branches, twigs and leaves become satisfied, and bysupplying food to the stomach all the senses of the body become
satisfied, and, similarly, by engaging in the transcendental service of
the Supreme Lord, all the demigods and all the living entitiesautomatically become satisfied.There are three divisions of Krsna conscious men. In the third classare those who have no faith. If they are engaged in devotional serviceofficially, for some ulterior purpose, they cannot achieve the highestperfectional stage. Most probably they will slip, after some time. Theymay become engaged, but because they haven't complete conviction andfaith, it is very difficult for them to continue in Krsnaconsciousness. We have practical experience in discharging ourmissionary activity that some people come and apply themselves to Krsnaconsciousness with some hidden motive, and as soon as they areeconomically a little well situated they give up this process and taketo their old ways again. It is only by faith that one can advance inKrsna consciousness. As far as the development of faith is concerned,one who is well versed in the literatures of devotional service and hasattained the stage of firm faith is called a first-class person inKrsna consciousness. And in the second-class are those who are not veryadvanced in understanding the devotional scriptures but whoautomatically have firm faith that krsna-bhakti or service to Krsna isthe best course and so in good faith have taken it up. Thus they aresuperior to the third-class who have neither perfect knowledge of thescriptures nor good faith but by association and simplicity are tryingto follow. The third-class person in Krsna consciousness may fall down,but when one is in the second-class or first-class he does not falldown. One in the first-class will surely make progress and achieve theresult at the end. As far as the third-class person in Krsnaconsciousness is concerned, although he has faith in the convictionthat devotional service to Krsna is very good, he has no knowledge ofKrsna through the scriptures like Srimad-Bhagavatam and Bhagavad-gita.Sometimes these third-class persons in Krsna consciousness have sometendency toward karma-yoga and jnana-yoga, and sometimes they aredisturbed, but as soon as the infection of karma-yoga or jnana-yoga isvanquished, they become second-class or first-class persons in Krsnaconsciousness. Faith in Krsna is also divided into three stages anddescribed in Srimad-Bhagavatam. First-class attachment, second-classattachment, and third-class attachment are also explained in Srimad-Bhagavatam in the Eleventh Canto. Those who have no faith even afterhearing about Krsna and the excellence of devotional service, who thinkthat it is simply eulogy, find the path very difficult, even if theyare supposedly engaged in devotional service. For them there is verylittle hope in gaining perfection. Thus faith is very important in thedischarge of devotional service.
TEXT 4
maya tatam idam sarvam
jagad avyakta-murtinamat-sthani sarva-bhutanina caham tesv avasthitah
SYNONYMSmaya--by Me; tatam--spread; idam--all these manifestations; sarvam--
all; jagat--cosmic manifestation; avyakta-murtina--unmanifested form;mat-sthani--unto Me; sarva-bhutani--all living entities; na--not; ca--also; aham--I; tesu--in them; avasthitah--situated.
TRANSLATION
By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All
beings are in Me, but I am not in them.
PURPORTThe Supreme Personality of Godhead is not perceivable through the gross
material senses. It is said that Lord Sri Krsna's name, fame, pastimes,etc., cannot be understood by material senses. Only to one who isengaged in pure devotional service under proper guidance is Herevealed. In the Brahma-samhita (5.38) it is stated, premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti: one cansee the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda, always within himselfand outside himself if he has developed the transcendental lovingattitude towards Him. Thus for people in general He is not visible.Here it is said that although He is all-pervading, everywhere present,He is yet not conceivable by the material senses. But actually,although we cannot see Him, everything is resting in Him. As we havediscussed in the Seventh Chapter, the entire material cosmicmanifestation is only a combination of His two different energies, thesuperior spiritual energy and the inferior material energy. Just as thesunshine is spread all over the universe, the energy of the Lord isspread all over the creation, and everything is resting in that energy.Yet one should not conclude that because He is spread all over He haslost His personal existence. To refute such an argument the Lord says,"I am everywhere, and everything is in Me, but still I am aloof." Forexample, a king heads a government which is but the manifestation ofthe king's energy; the different governmental departments are nothingbut the energies of the king, and each department is resting on theking's power. But still one cannot expect the king to be present inevery department personally. That is a crude example. Similarly, allthe manifestations that we see, and everything that exists both in thismaterial world and in the spiritual world, are resting on the energy ofthe Supreme Personality of Godhead. The creation takes place by thediffusion of His different energies, and, as it is stated in theBhagavad-gita, He is everywhere present by His personal representation,the diffusion of His different energies.
TEXT 5
na ca mat-sthani bhutani
pasya me yogam aisvarambhuta-bhrn na ca bhuta-sthomamatma bhuta-bhavanah
SYNONYMSna--never; ca--also; mat-sthani--situated in Me; bhutani--all creation;
pasya--just see; me--My; yogam aisvaram--inconceivable mystic power;bhuta-bhrt--maintainer of all living entities; na--never; ca--also;bhuta-sthah--in the cosmic manifestation; mama--My; atma--Self; bhuta-bhavanah--is the source of all manifestations.
TRANSLATIONAnd yet everything that is created does not rest in Me. Behold My
mystic opulence! Although I am the maintainer of all living entities,
and although I am everywhere, still My Self is the very source of
creation.
PURPORTThe Lord says that everything is resting on Him. This should not be
misunderstood. The Lord is not directly concerned with the maintenanceand sustenance of this material manifestation. Sometimes we see apicture of Atlas holding the globe on his shoulders; he seems to bevery tired, holding this great earthly planet. Such an image should notbe entertained in connection with Krsna's upholding this createduniverse. He says that although everything is resting on Him, still Heis aloof. The planetary systems are floating in space, and this spaceis the energy of the Supreme Lord. But He is different from space. Heis differently situated. Therefore the Lord says, "Although they aresituated on My inconceivable energy, still, as the Supreme Personalityof Godhead, I am aloof from them." This is the inconceivable opulenceof the Lord.In the Vedic dictionary it is said, "The Supreme Lord is performinginconceivably wonderful pastimes, displaying His energy. His person isfull of different potent energies, and His determination is itselfactual fact. In this way the Personality of Godhead is to beunderstood." We may think to doing something, but there are so manyimpediments, and sometimes it is not possible to do as we like. Butwhen Krsna wants to do something, simply by His willing, everything isperformed so perfectly that one cannot imagine how it is being done.The Lord explains this fact: although He is the maintainer andsustainer of the entire material manifestation, He does not touch thismaterial manifestation. Simply by His supreme will everything iscreated, everything is sustained, everything is maintained, andeverything is annihilated. There is no difference between His mind andHimself (as there is a difference between ourselves and our presentmaterial mind) because He is absolute spirit. Simultaneously the Lordis present in everything; yet the common man cannot understand how Heis also present personally. He is different from this materialmanifestation, yet everything is resting on Him. This is explained hereas yogam aisvaram, the mystic power of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead.
TEXT 6
yathakasa-sthito nityam
vayuh sarvatra-go mahantatha sarvani bhutanimat-sthanity upadharaya
SYNONYMSyatha--as much as; akasa-sthitah--situated in space; nityam--always;
vayuh--wind; sarvatra-gah--blowing everywhere; mahan--great; tatha--similarly; sarvani--everything; bhutani--created beings; mat-sthani--situated in Me; iti--thus; upadharaya--try to understand.
TRANSLATIONAs the mighty wind, blowing everywhere, always rests in ethereal space,
know that in the same manner all beings rest in Me.
PURPORT
For the ordinary person it is almost inconceivable how the huge
material creation is resting in Him. But the Lord is giving an examplewhich may help us to understand. Space is the biggest manifestation wecan conceive. The cosmic manifestation rests in space. Space permitsthe movement of even the atoms and on up to the greatest planets, theSun and the Moon. Although the sky (or wind or air) is great, still itis situated within space. Space is not beyond the sky.In the Upanisads, it is stated, "It is out of the fear of the SupremeLord that the wind is blowing." (Taittiriya Upanisad 2.8.1) In theBrhad-aranyaka Upanisad (3.8.9) it is stated, "By the supreme order,under the superintendence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, themoon, the sun, and other great planets are moving." In the Brahma-samhita (5.52) this is also stated. There is also a description of themovement of the sun, and it is said that the sun is considered to beone of the eyes of the Supreme Lord and that it has immense potency todiffuse heat and light. Still it is moving in its prescribed orbit bythe order and the supreme will of Govinda. So, from the Vedicliterature we can find evidence that this material manifestation, whichappears to us to be very wonderful and great, is under the completecontrol of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This will be furtherexplained in the later verses of this chapter.
TEXT 7
sarva-bhutani kaunteya
prakrtim yanti mamikamkalpa-ksaye punas tanikalpadau visrjamy aham
SYNONYMSsarva-bhutani--all created entities; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
prakrtim--nature; yanti--enter; mamikam--unto Me; kalpa-ksaye--at theend of the millennium; punah--again; tani--all those; kalpa-adau--inthe beginning of the millennium; visrjami--I create; aham--I.
TRANSLATIONO son of Kunti at the end of the millennium every material
manifestation enters into My nature, and at the beginning of anothermillennium, by My potency, I again create.
PURPORTThe creation, maintenance and annihilation of this material cosmic
manifestation is completely dependent on the supreme will of thePersonality of Godhead. "At the end of the millennium" means at thedeath of Brahma. Brahma lives for one hundred years, and his one day iscalculated at 4,300,000,000 of our earthly years. His night is of thesame duration. His month consists of thirty such days and nights, andhis year of twelve months. After one hundred such years, when Brahmadies, the devastation or annihilation takes place; this means that theenergy manifested by the Supreme Lord is again wound up in Himself.Then again, when there is need to manifest the cosmic world, it is doneby His will: "Although I am one, I shall become many." This is the
Vedic aphorism (Chandogya Upanisad 6.2.3). He expands Himself in this
material energy, and the whole cosmic manifestation again takes place.
TEXT 8
prakrtim svam avastabhya
visrjami punah punahbhuta-gramam imam krtsnamavasam prakrter vasat
SYNONYMSprakrtim--material nature; svam--of My personal Self; avastabhya--enter
in; visrjami--create; punah punah--again, again; bhuta-gramam--allthese cosmic manifestations; imam--this; krtsnam--total; avasam--automatically; prakrteh--by the force of nature; vasat--underobligation.
TRANSLATIONThe whole cosmic order is under Me. By My will it is manifested again
and again, and by My will it is annihilated at the end.
PURPORTThis matter is the manifestation of the inferior energy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. This has already been explained several times.At the creation, the material energy is let loose as the mahat-tattva,into which the Lord as His first Purusa incarnation, Maha-Visnu,enters. He lies within the Causal Ocean and breathes out innumerableuniverses, and into each universe the Lord again enters asGarbhodakasayi Visnu. Each universe is in that way created. He stillfurther manifests Himself as Ksirodakasayi Visnu, and that Visnu entersinto everything--even into the minute atom. This fact is explainedhere. He enters into everything.Now, as far as the living entities are concerned, they are impregnatedinto this material nature, and as a result of their past deeds theytake different positions. Thus the activities of this material worldbegin. The activities of the different species of living beings arebegun from the very moment of the creation. It is not that all isevolved. The different species of life are created immediately alongwith the universe. Men, animals, beasts, birds--everything issimultaneously created, because whatever desires the living entitieshad at the last annihilation are again manifested. It is clearly statedhere that the living entities have nothing to do with this process. Thestate of being in their past life in the past creation is simplymanifested again, and all this is done simply by His will. This is theinconceivable potency of the Supreme Personality of God. And aftercreating different species of life, He has no connection with them. Thecreation takes place to accommodate the inclinations of the variousliving entities, and so the Lord does not become involved with it.
TEXT 9
na ca mam tani karmani
nibadhnanti dhananjayaudasina-vad asinamasaktam tesu karmasu
SYNONYMS
na--never; ca--also; mam--Me; tani--all those; karmani--activities;
nibadhnanti--bind; dhananjaya--O conqueror of riches; udasina-vat--asneutral; asinam--situated; asaktam--without attraction; tesu--in them;karmasu--in activities.
TRANSLATIONO Dhananjaya, all this work cannot bind Me. I am ever detached, seated
as though neutral.
PURPORTOne should not think, in this connection, that the Supreme Personality
of Godhead has no engagement. In His spiritual world He is alwaysengaged. In the Brahma-samhita (5.6) it is stated, "He is alwaysinvolved in His eternal, blissful, spiritual activities, but He hasnothing to do with these material activities." Material activities arebeing carried on by His different potencies. The Lord is always neutralin the material activities of the created world. This neutrality isexplained here. Although He has control over every minute detail ofmatter, He is sitting as if neutral. The example can be given of a highcourt judge sitting on his bench. By his order so many things arehappening: someone is being hanged, someone is being put into jail,someone is awarded a huge amount of wealth--but still he is neutral. Hehas nothing to do with all that gain and loss. Similarly, the Lord isalways neutral, although He has His hand in every sphere of activity.In the Vedanta-sutra (2.1.34) it is stated that He is not situated inthe dualities of this material world. He is transcendental to thesedualities. Nor is He attached to the creation and annihilation of thismaterial world. The living entities take their different forms in thevarious species of life according to their past deeds, and the Lorddoesn't interfere with them.
TEXT 10
mayadhyaksena prakrtih
suyate sa-caracaramhetunanena kaunteyajagad viparivartate
SYNONYMSmaya--by Me; adhyaksena--by superintendence; prakrtih--material nature;
suyate--manifests; sa--with; cara-acaram--the moving and the nonmoving;hetuna--for this reason; anena--this; kaunteya--O son of Kunti; jagat--the cosmic manifestation; viparivartate--is working.
TRANSLATIONThis material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kunti, and
it is producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule thismanifestation is created and annihilated again and again.
PURPORT
It is clearly stated here that the Supreme Lord, although aloof from
all the activities of the material world, remains the supreme director.The Supreme Lord is the supreme will and the background of thismaterial manifestation, but the management is being conducted bymaterial nature. Krsna also states in Bhagavad-gita that of all of theliving entities in different forms and species, "I am the father." Thefather gives seeds to the womb of the mother for the child, andsimilarly the Supreme Lord by His mere glance injects all the livingentities into the womb of material nature, and they come out in theirdifferent forms and species, according to their last desires andactivities. All these living entities, although born under the glanceof the Supreme Lord, still take their different bodies according totheir past deeds and desires. So the Lord is not directly attached tothis material creation. He simply glances over material nature;material nature is thus activated, and everything is createdimmediately. Because He glances over material nature, there isundoubtedly activity on the part of the Supreme Lord, but He hasnothing to do with the manifestation of the material world directly.This example is given in the smrti: when there is a fragrant flowerbefore someone, the fragrance is touched by the smelling power of theperson, yet the smelling and the flower are detached from one another.There is a similar connection between the material world and theSupreme Personality of Godhead; actually He has nothing to do with thismaterial world, but He creates by His glance and ordains. In summary,material nature, without the superintendence of the Supreme Personalityof Godhead, cannot do anything. Yet the Supreme Personality is detachedfrom all material activities.
TEXT 11
avajananti mam mudha
manusim tanum asritamparam bhavam ajanantomama bhuta-mahesvaram
SYNONYMSavajananti--deride; mam--Me; mudhah--foolish men; manusim--in human
form; tanum--body; asritam--assuming; param--transcendental; bhavam--nature; ajanantah--not knowing; mama--Mine; bhuta--everything that be;maha-isvaram--the supreme proprietor.
TRANSLATIONFools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They do not know My
transcendental nature and My supreme dominion over all that be.
PURPORTFrom the other explanations of the previous verses in this chapter, it
is clear that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although appearinglike a human being, is not a common man. The Personality of Godhead,who conducts the creation, maintenance and annihilation of the completecosmic manifestation, cannot be a human being. Yet there are manyfoolish men who consider Krsna to be merely a powerful man and nothingmore. Actually, He is the original Supreme Personality, as is confirmedin the Brahma-samhita (isvarah paramah krsnah); He is the Supreme Lord.
There are many isvaras, controllers, and one appears greater than
another. In the ordinary management of affairs in the material world,we find some official or director, and above him there is a secretary,and above him a minister, and above him a president. Each of them is acontroller, but one is controlled by another. In the Brahma-samhita itis said that Krsna is the supreme controller; there are manycontrollers undoubtedly, both in the material and spiritual world, butKrsna is the supreme controller (isvarah paramah krsnah) and His bodyis sac-cid-ananda, nonmaterial.Material bodies cannot perform the wonderful acts described in previousverses. His body is eternal, blissful and full of knowledge. AlthoughHe is not a common man, the foolish deride Him and consider Him to be aman. His body is called here manusim because He is acting just like aman, a friend of Arjuna's, a politician involved in the Battle ofKuruksetra. In so many ways He is acting just like an ordinary man, butactually His body is sac-cid-ananda-vigraha--eternal bliss andknowledge absolute. This is confirmed in the Vedic language also. Sac-cid-ananda-rupaya krsnaya: "I offer my obeisances unto the SupremePersonality of Godhead, Krsna, who is the eternal blissful form ofknowledge." (Gopala-tapani Upanisad 1.1) There are other descriptionsin the Vedic language also. Tam ekam govindam: "You are Govinda, thepleasure of the senses and the cows." Sac-cid-ananda-vigraham: "AndYour form is transcendental, full of knowledge, bliss and eternality."(Gopala-tapani Upanisad 1.35)Despite the transcendental qualities of Lord Krsna's body, its fullbliss and knowledge, there are many so-called scholars and commentatorsof Bhagavad-gita who deride Krsna as an ordinary man. The scholar maybe born an extraordinary man due to his previous good work, but thisconception of Sri Krsna is due to a poor fund of knowledge. Thereforehe is called mudha, for only foolish persons consider Krsna to be anordinary human being because they do not know the confidentialactivities of the Supreme Lord and His different energies. They do notknow that Krsna's body is a symbol of complete knowledge and bliss,that He is the proprietor of everything that be and that He can awardliberation to anyone. Because they do not know that Krsna has so manytranscendental qualifications, they deride Him.Nor do they know that the appearance of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead in this material world is a manifestation of His internalenergy. He is the master of the material energy. As has been explainedin several places (mama maya duratyaya), He claims that the materialenergy, although very powerful, is under His control, and whoeversurrenders unto Him can get out of the control of this material energy.If a soul surrendered to Krsna can get out of the influence of materialenergy, then how can the Supreme Lord, who conducts the creation,maintenance and annihilation of the whole cosmic nature, have amaterial body like us? So this conception of Krsna is completefoolishness. Foolish persons, however, cannot conceive that thePersonality of Godhead, Krsna, appearing just like an ordinary man, canbe the controller of all the atoms and of the gigantic manifestation ofthe universal form. The biggest and the minutest are beyond theirconception, so they cannot imagine that a form like that of a humanbeing can simultaneously control the infinite and the minute. Actuallyalthough He is controlling the infinite and the finite, He is apartfrom all this manifestation. It is clearly stated concerning His yogamaisvaram, His inconceivable transcendental energy, that He can controlthe infinite and the finite simultaneously and that He can remain alooffrom them. Although the foolish cannot imagine how Krsna, who appearsjust like a human being, can control the infinite and the finite, those
who are pure devotees accept this, for they know that Krsna is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore they completely surrenderunto Him and engage in Krsna consciousness, devotional service of theLord.There are many controversies amongst the impersonalists and thepersonalists about the Lord's appearance as a human being. But if weconsult Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam, the authoritative textsfor understanding the science of Krsna, then we can understand thatKrsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is not an ordinary man,although He appeared on this earth as an ordinary human. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam, First Canto, First Chapter, when the sages inquire aboutthe activities of Krsna, it is stated that His appearance as a manbewilders the foolish. No human being could perform the wonderful actsthat Krsna performed while He was present on this earth. When Krsnaappeared before His father and mother, Vasudeva and Devaki, He appearedwith four hands, but after the prayers of the parents, He transformedHimself into an ordinary child. His appearance as an ordinary humanbeing is one of the features of His transcendental body. In theEleventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gita also it is stated that Arjuna prayedto see Krsna's form of four hands (tenaiva rupena catur-bhujena).Arjuna prayed to see again that form of four hands, and when Krsna wasthus petitioned by Arjuna, He again assumed His original form. Allthese different features of the Supreme Lord are certainly not those ofan ordinary human being.Some of those who deride Krsna, who are infected with the Mayavadi,philosophy quote the following verse from the Srimad-Bhagavatam(3.29.21) to prove that Krsna is just an ordinary man. Aham sarvesubhutesu bhutatmavasthitah sada: "The Supreme is present in every livingentity." We should better take note of this particular verse from theVaisnava acaryas like Jiva Gosvami instead of following theinterpretation of unauthorized persons who deride Krsna. Jiva Gosvami,commenting on this verse, says that Krsna, in His plenary expansion asParamatma, is situated in the moving and the nonmoving entities as theSupersoul, so any neophyte devotee who simply gives his attention tothe arca-murti, the form of the Supreme Lord in the temple, and doesnot respect other living entities is uselessly worshiping the form ofthe Lord in the temple. There are three kinds of devotees of the Lord,and the neophyte is in the lowest stage. The neophyte devotee givesmore attention to the Deity in the temple than to other devotees, soJiva Gosvami warns that this sort of mentality should be corrected. Adevotee should see that Krsna is present in everyone's heart asParamatma; therefore every body is the embodiment of or the temple ofthe Supreme Lord, and as such, as one offers respect to the temple ofthe Lord, he should similarly properly respect each and every body inwhom the Paramatma dwells. Everyone should therefore be given properrespect and should not be neglected.There are also many impersonalists who deride temple worship. They saythat since God is everywhere, why should one restrict himself to templeworship? But if God is everywhere, is He not in the temple or in theDeity? Although the personalist and the impersonalist will fight withone another perpetually, a perfect devotee in Krsna consciousness knowsthat although Krsna is the Supreme Personality, He is all-pervading, asis confirmed in the Brahma-samhita. Although His personal abode isGoloka Vrndavana and He is always staying there, still, by Hisdifferent manifestations of energy and by His plenary expansion, He ispresent everywhere in all parts of the material and spiritualcreations.
TEXT 12
moghasa mogha-karmano
mogha-jnana vicetasahraksasim asurim caivaprakrtim mohinim sritah
SYNONYMSmogha-asah--baffled hope; mogha-karmanah--baffled in fruitive
activities; mogha-jnanah--baffled in knowledge; vicetasah--bewildered;raksasim--demonic; asurim--atheistic; ca--and; eva--certainly;prakrtim--nature; mohinim--bewildering; sritah--taking shelter of.
TRANSLATIONThose who are thus bewildered are attracted by demonic and atheistic
views. In that deluded condition, their hopes for liberation, theirfruitive activities, and their culture of knowledge are all defeated.
PURPORTThere are many devotees who assume themselves to be in Krsna
consciousness and devotional service but at heart do not accept theSupreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, as the Absolute Truth. For them,the fruit of devotional service--going back to Godhead--will never betasted. Similarly, those who are engaged in fruitive, pious activitiesand who are ultimately hoping to be liberated from this materialentanglement will never be successful either because they deride theSupreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. In other words, persons who mockKrsna are to be understood to be demonic or atheistic. As described inthe Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gita, such demonic miscreants neversurrender to Krsna. Therefore their mental speculations to arrive atthe Absolute Truth bring them to the false conclusion that the ordinaryliving entity and Krsna are one and the same. With such a falseconviction, they think that the body of any human being is now simplycovered by material nature and that as soon as one is liberated fromthis material body there is no difference between God and himself. Thisattempt to become one with Krsna will be baffled because of delusion.Such atheistic and demoniac cultivation of spiritual knowledge isalways futile. That is the indication of this verse. For such persons,cultivation of the knowledge in the Vedic literature, like the Vedanta-sutra and the Upanisads, is always baffled.It is a great offense, therefore, to consider Krsna, the SupremePersonality of Godhead, to be an ordinary man. Those who do so arecertainly deluded because they cannot understand the eternal form ofKrsna. In the Brhad-viasnava mantra it is clearly stated that one whoconsiders the body of Krsna to be material should be driven out fromall rituals and activities of the sruti. And if one by chance sees hisface, he should at once take bath in the Ganges to rid himself ofinfection. People jeer at Krsna because they are envious of the SupremePersonality of Godhead. Their destiny is certainly to take birth afterbirth in the species of atheistic and demoniac life. Perpetually, theirreal knowledge will remain under delusion, and gradually they willregress to the darkest region of creation.
TEXT 13
mahatmanas tu mam partha
daivim prakrtim asritahbhajanty ananya-manasojnatva bhutadim avyayam
SYNONYMSmaha-atmanah--the great souls; tu--but; mam--unto Me; partha--O son of
Prtha; daivim--divine; prakrtim--nature; asritah--taken shelter of;bhajanti--render service; ananya-manasah--without deviation of themind; jnatva--knowing; bhuta--creation; adim--original; avyayam--inexhaustible.
TRANSLATIONO son of Prtha, those who are not deluded, the great souls, are under
the protection of the divine nature. They are fully engaged indevotional service because they know Me as the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, original and inexhaustible.
PURPORTIn this verse the description of mahatma is clearly given. The first
sign of the mahatma is that he is already situated in the divinenature. He is not under the control of material nature. And how is thiseffected? That is explained in the Seventh Chapter: one who surrendersunto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, at once becomesfreed from the control of material nature. That is the qualification.One can become free from the control of material nature as soon as hesurrenders his soul to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is thepreliminary formula. Being marginal potency, as soon as the livingentity is freed from the control of material nature, he is put underthe guidance of the spiritual nature. The guidance of the spiritualnature is called daivi prakrti, divine nature. So when one is promotedin that way--by surrendering to the Supreme Personality of Godhead--oneattains to the stage of great soul, mahatma.The mahatma does not divert his attention to anything outside Krsnabecause he knows perfectly well that Krsna is the original SupremePerson, the cause of all causes. There is no doubt about it. Such amahatma, or great soul, develops through association with othermahatmas, pure devotees. Pure devotees are not even attracted byKrsna's other features, such as the four-armed Maha-Visnu. They aresimply attracted by the two-armed form of Krsna. Since they are notattracted to other features of Krsna (what to speak of the demigods),they are mot concerned with any form of a demigod or of a human being.They only meditate upon Krsna in Krsna consciousness. They are alwaysengaging in the unswerving service of the Lord in Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 14
satatam kirtayanto mam
yatantas ca drdha-vratahnamasyantas ca mam bhaktyanitya-yukta upasate
SYNONYMS
satatam--always; kirtayantah--chanting; mam--Me; yatantah ca--fully
endeavoring also; drdha-vratah--with determination; namasyantah ca--offering obeisances; mam--unto Me; bhaktya--in devotion; nitya-yuktah--perpetually engaged; upasate--worship.
TRANSLATIONAlways chanting My glories, endeavoring with great determination,
bowing down before Me, these great souls perpetually worship Me withdevotion.
PURPORTThe mahatma cannot be manufactured by rubber-stamping an ordinary man.
His symptoms are described here: a mahatma is always engaged inchanting the glories of the Supreme Lord Krsna, the Personality ofGodhead. He has no other business. He is always engaged in theglorification of the Lord. In other words, he is not an impersonalist.When the question of glorification is there, one has to glorify theSupreme Lord, praising His holy name, His eternal form, Histranscendental qualities and His uncommon pastimes. One has to glorifyall these things; therefore a mahatma is attached to the SupremePersonality of Godhead.One who is attached to the impersonal feature of the Supreme Lord, thebrahmajyoti, is not described as mahatma in the Bhagavad-gita. He isdescribed in a different way in the next verse. The mahatma is alwaysengaged in different activities of devotional service, as described inthe Srimad-Bhagavatam, hearing and chanting about Visnu, not a demigodor human being. That is devotion: sravanam kirtanam visnoh andsmaranam, remembering Him. Such a mahatma has firm determination toachieve at the ultimate end the association of the Supreme Lord in anyone of the five transcendental rasas. To achieve that success, heengages all activities--mental, bodily and vocal, everything--in theservice of the Supreme Lord, Sri Krsna. That is called full Krsnaconsciousness.In devotional service there are certain activities which are calleddetermined, such as fasting on certain days, like the eleventh day ofthe moon, Ekadasi, and on the appearance day of the Lord, etc. Allthese rules and regulations are offered by the great acaryas for thosewho are actually interested in getting admission into the associationof the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the transcendental world. Themahatmas, great souls, strictly observe all these rules andregulations, and therefore they are sure to achieve the desired result.As described in the second verse of this chapter, this devotionalservice is not only easy, but it can be performed in a happy mood. Onedoes not need to undergo any severe penance and austerity. He can livethis life in devotional service, guided by an expert spiritual master,and in any position, either as a householder or a sannyasi or abrahmacari; in any position and anywhere in the world, he can performthis devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and thusbecome actually mahatma, a great soul.
TEXT 15
jnana-yajnena capy anye
yajanto mam upasateekatvena prthaktvenabahudha visvato-mukham
SYNONYMS
jnana-yajnena--by cultivation of knowledge; ca--also; api--certainly;
anye--others; yajantah--worshiping; mam--Me; upasate--worship;ekatvena--in oneness; prthaktvena--in duality; bahudha--diversity;visvatah-mukham--in the universal form.
TRANSLATIONOthers, who are engaged in the cultivation of knowledge, worship the
Supreme Lord as the one without a second, diverse in many, and in theuniversal form.
PURPORTThis verse is the summary of the previous verses. The Lord tells Arjuna
that those who are purely in Krsna consciousness and do not knowanything other than Krsna are called mahatma; yet there are otherpersons who are not exactly in the position of mahatma but who worshipKrsna also, in different ways. Some of them are already described asthe distressed, the financially destitute, the inquisitive, and thosewho are engaged in the cultivation of knowledge. But there are otherswho are still lower, and these are divided into three: 1) he whoworships himself as one with the Supreme Lord, 2) he who concocts someform of the Supreme Lord and worships that, and 3) he who accepts theuniversal form, the visvarupa of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,and worships that. Out of the above three, the lowest, those whoworship themselves as the Supreme Lord, thinking themselves to bemonists, are most predominant. Such people think themselves to be theSupreme Lord, and in this mentality they worship themselves. This isalso a type of God worship, for they can understand that they are notthe material body but are actually spiritual soul; at least, such asense is prominent. Generally the impersonalists worship the SupremeLord in this way. The second class includes the worshipers of thedemigods, those who by imagination consider any form to be the form ofthe Supreme Lord. And the third class includes those who cannotconceive of anything beyond the manifestation of this materialuniverse. They consider the universe to be the supreme organism orentity and worship that. The universe is also a form of the Lord.
TEXT 16
aham kratur aham yajnahsvadhaham aham ausadhammantro 'ham aham evajyamaham agnir aham hutam
SYNONYMSaham--I; kratuh--ritual; aham--I; yajnah--sacrifice; svadha--oblation;
aham--I; aham--I; ausadham--healing herb; mantrah--transcendentalchant; aham--I; aham--I; eva--certainly; ajyam--melted butter; aham--I;agnih--fire; aham--I; hutam--offering.
TRANSLATION
But it is I who am the ritual, I the sacrifice, the offering to the
ancestors, the healing herb, the transcendental chant. I am the butterand the fire and the offering.
PURPORTThe sacrifice known as jyotistoma is also Krsna, and He is also the
maha-yajna. The oblations offered to the Pitrloka or the sacrificeperformed to please the Pitrloka, considered as a kind of drug in theform of clarified butter, is also Krsna. The mantras chanted in thisconnection are also Krsna. And many other commodities made with milkproducts for offering in the sacrifices are also Krsna. The fire isalso Krsna because fire is one of the five material elements and istherefore claimed as the separated energy of Krsna. In other words, theVedic sacrifices recommended in the karma-kanda division of the Vedasare in total also Krsna. Or, in other words, those who are engaged inrendering devotional service unto Krsna are to be understood to haveperformed all the sacrifices recommended in the Vedas.
TEXT 17
pitaham asya jagato
mata dhata pitamahahvedyam pavitram omkarark sama yajur eva ca
SYNONYMSpita--father; aham--I; asya--of this; jagatah--of the universe; mata--
mother; dhata--supporter; pitamahah--grandfather; vedyam--what is to beknown; pavitram--that which purifies; om-kara--the syllable om; rk--theRg Veda; sama--the Sama Veda; yajuh--the Yajur Veda; eva--certainly;ca--and.
TRANSLATIONI am the father of this universe, the mother, the support, and the
grandsire. I am the object of knowledge, the purifier and the syllableom. I am also the Rg, the Sama, and the Yajur [Vedas].
PURPORTThe entire cosmic manifestations, moving and nonmoving, are manifested
by different activities of Krsna's energy. In the material existence wecreate different relationships with different living entities who arenothing but Krsna's marginal energy, but under the creation of prakrtisome of them appear as our father, mother, grandfather, creator, etc.,but actually they are parts and parcels of Krsna. As such, these livingentities who appear to be our father, mother, etc., are nothing butKrsna. In this verse the word dhata means "creator." Not only are ourfather and mother parts and parcels of Krsna, but their creator,grandmother and grandfather, etc., are also Krsna. Actually any livingentity, being part and parcel of Krsna, is Krsna. All the Vedas,therefore, aim only toward Krsna. Whatever we want to know through theVedas is but a progressive step to understanding Krsna. That subjectmatter which helps us purify our constitutional position is especiallyKrsna. Similarly, the living entity who is inquisitive to understandall Vedic principles is also part and parcel of Krsna and as such is
also Krsna. In all the Vedic mantras the word om, called pranava, is a
transcendental sound vibration and is also Krsna. And because in allthe hymns of the four Vedas, Sama, Yajur, Rg and Atharva, the pranavaor omkara, is very prominent, it is understood to be Krsna.
TEXT 18
gatir bharta prabhuh saksi
nivasah saranam suhrtprabhavah pralayah sthanamnidhanam bijam avyayam
SYNONYMSgatih--goal; bharta--sustainer; prabhuh--Lord; saksi--witness; nivasah-
-abode; saranam--refuge; su-hrt--most intimate friend; prabhavah--creation; pralayah--dissolution; sthanam--ground; nidhanam--restingplace; bijam--seed; avyayam--imperishable.
TRANSLATIONI am the goal, the sustainer, the master, the witness, the abode, the
refuge and the most dear friend. I am the creation and theannihilation, the basis of everything, the resting place and theeternal seed.
PURPORTGati means the destination where we want to go. But the ultimate goal
is Krsna, although people do not know it. One who does not know Krsnais misled, and his so-called progressive march is either partial orhallucinatory. There are many who make as their destination differentdemigods, and by rigid performance of the strict respective methodsthey reach different planets known as Candraloka, Suryaloka, Indraloka,Maharloka, etc. But all such lokas, or planets, being creations ofKrsna, are simultaneously Krsna and not Krsna. Actually such planets,being manifestations of Krsna's energy, are also Krsna, but actuallythey serve only as a step forward for realization of Krsna. To approachthe different energies of Krsna is to approach Krsna indirectly. Oneshould directly approach Krsna, for that will save time and energy. Forexample, if there is a possibility of going to the top of a building bythe help of an elevator, why should one go by the staircase, step bystep? Everything is resting on Krsna's energy; therefore withoutKrsna's shelter nothing can exist. Krsna is the supreme ruler becauseeverything belongs to Him and everything exists on His energy. Krsna,being situated in everyone's heart, is the supreme witness. Theresidences, countries or planets on which we live are also Krsna. Krsnais the ultimate goal of shelter, and as such one should take shelter ofKrsna either for protection or for annihilation of his distressedcondition. And whenever we have to take protection, we should know thatour protection must be a living force. Thus Krsna is the supreme livingentity. Since Krsna is the source of our generation, or the supremefather, no one can be a better friend than Krsna, nor can anyone be abetter well-wisher. Krsna is the original source of creation and theultimate rest after annihilation. Krsna is therefore the eternal causeof all causes.
TEXT 19
tapamy aham aham varsam
nigrhnamy utsrjami caamrtam caiva mrtyus casad asac caham arjuna
SYNONYMStapami--give heat; aham--I; aham--I; varsam--rain; nigrhnami--withhold;
utsrjami--send forth; ca--and; amrtam--immortality; ca--and; eva--certainly; mrtyuh--death; ca--and; sat--being; asat--nonbeing; ca--and;aham--I; arjuna--O Arjuna.
TRANSLATIONO Arjuna, I control heat, the rain and the drought. I am immortality,
and I am also death personified. Both being and nonbeing are in Me.
PURPORTKrsna, by His different energies, diffuses heat and light through the
agency of electricity and the sun. During summer season it is Krsna whochecks rain from falling from the sky, and then during the rainy seasonHe gives unceasing torrents of rain. The energy which sustains us byprolonging the duration of our life is Krsna, and Krsna meets us at theend as death. By analyzing all these different energies of Krsna, onecan ascertain that for Krsna there is no distinction between matter andspirit, or, in other words, He is both matter and spirit. In theadvanced stage of Krsna consciousness, one does not therefore make suchdistinctions. He sees Krsna only in everything.Since Krsna is both matter and spirit, the gigantic universal formcomprising all material manifestations is also Krsna, and His pastimesin Vrndavana as two-handed Syamasundara, playing on a flute, are thoseof the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 20
trai-vidya mam soma-pah puta-papa
yajnair istva svar-gatim prarthayantete punyam asadya surendra-lokamasnanti divyan divi deva-bhogan
SYNONYMStrai-vidyah--the knowers of the three Vedas; mam--unto Me; soma-pah--
drinkers of soma juice; puta--purified; papah--sins; yajnaih--withsacrifices; istva--after worshiping; svah-gatim--passage to heaven;prarthayante--pray; te--they; punyam--virtue; asadya--enjoying; sura-indra--of Indra; lokam--the world; asnanti--enjoy; divyan--celestial;divi--in heaven; deva-bhogan--pleasures of the gods.
TRANSLATIONThose who study the Vedas and drink the soma juice, seeking the
heavenly planets, worship Me indirectly. They take birth on the planetof Indra, where they enjoy godly delights.
PURPORT
The word trai-vidyah refers to the three Vedas, Sama, Yajur and Rg. A
brahmana who has studied these three Vedas is called a tri-vedi. Anyonewho is very much attached to knowledge derived from these three Vedasis respected in society. Unfortunately, there are many great scholarsof the Vedas who do not know the ultimate purport of studying them.Therefore Krsna herein declares Himself to be the ultimate goal for thetri-vedis. Actual tri-vedis take shelter under the lotus feet of Krsnaand engage in pure devotional service to satisfy the Lord. Devotionalservice begins with the chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra and side byside trying to understand Krsna in truth. Unfortunately those who aresimply official students of the Vedas become more interested inoffering sacrifices to the different demigods like Indra, Candra, etc.By such endeavor, the worshipers of different demigods are certainlypurified of the contamination of the lower qualities of nature and arethereby elevated to the higher planetary systems or heavenly planetsknown as Maharloka, Janoloka, Tapoloka, etc. Once situated on thosehigher planetary systems, one can satisfy his senses hundreds ofthousands of times better than on this planet.
TEXT 21
te tam bhuktva svarga-lokam visalam
ksine punye martya-lokam visantievam trayi-dharmam anuprapannagatagatam kama-kama labhante
SYNONYMSte--they; tam--that; bhuktva--enjoying; svarga-lokam--heaven; visalam--
vast; ksine--being exhausted; punye--merits; martya-lokam--mortalearth; visanti--fall down; evam--thus; trayi--three Vedas; dharmam--doctrines; anuprapannah--following; gata-agatam--death and birth; kama-kamah--desiring sense enjoyments; labhante--attain.
TRANSLATIONWhen they have thus enjoyed heavenly sense pleasure, they return to
this mortal planet again. Thus, through the Vedic principles, theyachieve only flickering happiness.
PURPORTOne who is promoted to those higher planetary systems enjoys a longer
duration of life and better facilities for sense enjoyment, yet one isnot allowed to stay there forever. One is again sent back to thisearthly planet upon finishing the resultant fruits of pious activities.He who has not attained perfection of knowledge, as indicated in theVedanta-sutra (janmady asya yatah), or, in other words, he who fails tounderstand Krsna, the cause of all causes, becomes baffled in achievingthe ultimate goal of life and is thus subjected to the routine of beingpromoted to the higher planets and then again coming down, as ifsituated on a ferris wheel which sometimes goes up and sometimes comesdown. The purport is that instead of being elevated to the spiritualworld where there is no longer any possibility of coming down, onesimply revolves in the cycle of birth and death on higher and lowerplanetary systems. One should better take to the spiritual world to
enjoy eternal life of full bliss and knowledge and never return to this
miserable material existence.
TEXT 22
ananyas cintayanto mam
ye janah paryupasatetesam nityabhiyuktanamyoga-ksemam vahamy aham
SYNONYMSananyah--no other; cintayantah--concentrating; mam--unto Me; ye--who;
janah--persons; paryupasate--properly worship; tesam--their; nitya--always; abhiyuktanam--fixed in devotion; yoga-ksemam--requirements;vahami--carry; aham--I.
TRANSLATIONBut those who worship Me with devotion, meditating on My transcendental
form--to them I carry what they lack and preserve what they have.
PURPORTOne who is unable to live for a moment without Krsna consciousness
cannot but think of Krsna twenty-four hours, being engaged indevotional service by hearing, chanting, remembering, offering prayers,worshiping, serving the lotus feet of the Lord, rendering otherservices, cultivating friendship and surrendering fully to the Lord.Such activities are all auspicious and full of spiritual potencies;indeed, they make the devotee perfect in self-realization. Then hisonly desire is to achieve the association of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. This is called yoga. By the mercy of the Lord, such a devoteenever comes back to this material condition of life. Ksema refers tothe merciful protection of the Lord. The Lord helps the devotee toachieve Krsna consciousness by yoga, and when he becomes fully Krsnaconscious the Lord protects him from falling down to a miserableconditioned life.
TEXT 23
ye 'py anya-devata-bhakta
yajante sraddhayanvitahte 'pi mam eva kaunteyayajanty avidhi-purvakam
SYNONYMSye--those; api--also; anya--other; devata--demigods; bhaktah--devotees;
yajante--worship; sraddhaya anvitah--with faith; te--they; api--also;mam--Me; eva--even; kaunteya--O son of Kunti; yajanti--sacrifice;avidhi-purvakam--in a wrong way.
TRANSLATIONWhatever a man may sacrifice to other gods, O son of Kunti, is really
meant for Me alone, but it is offered without true understanding.
PURPORT
"Persons who are engaged in the worship of demigods are not very
intelligent, although such worship is done to Me indirectly," Krsnasays. For example, when a man pours water on the leaves and branches ofa tree without pouring water on the root, he does so without sufficientknowledge or without observing regulative principles. Similarly, theprocess of rendering service to the different parts of the body is tosupply food to the stomach. The demigods are, so to speak, differentofficers and directors in the government of the Supreme Lord. One hasto follow the laws made by the government, not by the officers ordirectors. Similarly, everyone is to offer his worship to the SupremeLord only. That will automatically satisfy the different officers anddirectors of the Lord. The officers and directors are engaged asrepresentatives of the government, and to offer some bribe to theofficers and directors is illegal. This is stated here as avidhi-purvakam. In other words, Krsna does not approve the unnecessaryworship of the demigods.
TEXT 24
aham hi sarva-yajnanam
bhokta ca prabhur eva cana tu mam abhijanantitattvenatas cyavanti te
SYNONYMSaham--I; hi--surely; sarva--of all; yajnanam--sacrifices; bhokta--
enjoyer; ca--and; prabhuh--Lord; eva--also; ca--and; na--not; tu--but;mam--Me; abhijananti--know; tattvena--in reality; atah--therefore;cyavanti--fall down; te--they.
TRANSLATIONI am the only enjoyer and the only object of sacrifice. Those who do
not recognize My true transcendental nature fall down.
PURPORTHere it is clearly stated that there are many types of yajna
performances recommended in the Vedic literatures, but actually all ofthem are meant for satisfying the Supreme Lord. Yajna means Visnu. Inthe Second Chapter of Bhagavad-gita it is clearly stated that oneshould only work for satisfying Yajna or Visnu. The perfectional formof human civilization, known as varnasrama-dharma, is specificallymeant for satisfying Visnu. Therefore, Krsna says in this verse, "I amthe enjoyer of all sacrifices because I am the supreme master."However, less intelligent persons, without knowing this fact, worshipdemigods for temporary benefit. Therefore they fall down to materialexistence and do not achieve the desired goal of life. If, however,anyone has any material desire to be fulfilled, he had better pray forit to the Supreme Lord (although that is not pure devotion), and hewill thus achieve the desired result.
TEXT 25
yanti deva-vrata devan
pitrn yanti pitr-vratah
bhutani yanti bhutejyayanti mad-yajino 'pi mam
SYNONYMSyanti--achieve; deva-vratah--worshipers of demigods; devan--to
demigods; pitrn--to ancestors; yanti--go; pitr-vratah--worshipers ofthe ancestors; bhutani--to ghosts and spirits; yanti--go; bhuta-ijyah--worshipers of ghosts and spirits; yanti--go; mat--My; yajinah--devotees; api--also; mam--unto Me.
TRANSLATIONThose who worship the demigods will take birth among the demigods;
those who worship ghosts and spirits will take birth among such beings;those who worship ancestors go to the ancestors; and those who worshipMe will live with Me.
PURPORTIf one has any desire to go to the moon, the sun, or any other planet,
one can attain the desired destination by following specific Vedicprinciples recommended for that purpose. These are vividly described inthe fruitive activities portion of the Vedas, technically known asdarsa-paurnamasi, which recommends a specific worship of demigodssituated on different heavenly planets. Similarly, one can attain thePita planets by performing a specific yajna. Similarly, one can go tomany ghostly planets and become a Yaksa, Raksa or Pisaca. Pisacaworship is called "black arts" or "black magic." There are many men whopractice this black art, and they think that it is spiritualism, butsuch activities are completely materialistic. Similarly, a puredevotee, who worships the Supreme Personality of Godhead only, achievesthe planets of Vaikuntha and Krsnaloka without a doubt. It is very easyto understand through this important verse that if by simply worshipingthe demigods one can achieve the heavenly planets, or by worshiping thePitas achieve the Pita planets, or by practicing the black arts achievethe ghostly planets, why can the pure devotee not achieve the planet ofKrsna or Visnu? Unfortunately many people have no information of thesesublime planets where Krsna and Visnu live, and because they do notknow of them they fall down. Even the impersonalists fall down from thebrahmajyoti. This Krsna consciousness movement is thereforedistributing sublime information to the entire human society to theeffect that simply by chanting the Hare Krsna mantra one can becomeperfect in this life and go back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 26
patram puspam phalam toyam
yo me bhaktya prayacchatitad aham bhakty-upahrtamasnami prayatatmanah
SYNONYMSpatram--a leaf; puspam--a flower; phalam--a fruit; toyam--water; yah--
whoever; me--unto Me; bhaktya--with devotion; prayacchati--offers; tat-
-that; aham--I; bhakti-upahrtam--offered in devotion; asnami--accept;
prayata-atmanah--of one in pure consciousness.
TRANSLATIONIf one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit or
water, I will accept it.
PURPORTHere Lord Krsna, having established that He is the only enjoyer, the
primeval Lord, and the real object of all sacrificial offerings,reveals what types of sacrifices He desires to be offered. If onewishes to engage in devotional service to the Supreme in order to bepurified and reach the goal of life--the transcendental loving serviceof God--then he should find out what the Lord desires of him. One wholoves Krsna will give Him whatever He wants, and he avoids offeringanything which is undesirable or unasked for. Thus meat, fish and eggsshould not be offered to Krsna. If He desired such things as offerings,He would have said so. Instead He clearly requests that a leaf, afruit, flowers and water be given to Him, and He says of this offering,"I will accept it." Therefore, we should understand that He will notaccept meat, fish and eggs. Vegetables, grains, fruits, milk and waterare the proper foods for human beings and are prescribed by Lord KrsnaHimself. Whatever else we eat cannot be offered to Him, since He willnot accept it. Thus we cannot be acting on the level of loving devotionif we offer such foods.In the Third Chapter, verse thirteen, Sri Krsna explains that only theremains of sacrifice are purified and fit for consumption by those whoare seeking advancement in life and release from the clutches of thematerial entanglement. Those who do not make an offering of their food,He says in the same verse, are said to be eating only sin. In otherwords, their every mouthful is simply deepening their involvement inthe complexities of material nature. But preparing nice, simplevegetable dishes, offering them before the picture or Deity of LordKrsna and bowing down and praying for Him to accept such a humbleoffering, enables one to advance steadily in life, to purify the body,and to create fine brain tissues which will lead to clear thinking.Above all, the offering should be made with an attitude of love. Krsnahas no need of food, since He already possesses everything that be, yetHe will accept the offering of one who desires to please Him in thatway. The important element, in preparation, in serving and in offering,is to act with love for Krsna.The impersonalist philosophers, who wish to maintain that the AbsoluteTruth is without senses, cannot comprehend this verse of Bhagavad-gita.To them, it is either a metaphor or proof of the mundane character ofKrsna, the speaker of the Gita. But, in actuality, Krsna, the SupremeGodhead, has senses, and it is stated that His senses areinterchangeable; in other words, one sense can perform the function ofany other. This is what it means to say that Krsna is absolute. Lackingsenses, He could hardly be considered full in all opulences. In theSeventh Chapter, Krsna has explained that He impregnates the livingentities into material nature. This is done by His looking uponmaterial nature. And so in this instance, Krsna's hearing the devotee'swords of love in offering foodstuffs is wholly identical with Hiseating and actually tasting. This point should be emphasized: becauseof His absolute position, His hearing is wholly identical with Hiseating and tasting. Only the devotee, who accepts Krsna as He describes
Himself, without interpretation, can understand that the Supreme
Absolute Truth can eat food and enjoy it.
TEXT 27
yat karosi yad asnasi
yaj juhosi dadasi yatyat tapasyasi kaunteyatat kurusva mad-arpanam
SYNONYMSyat--whatever; karosi--you do; yat--whatever; asnasi--you eat; yat--
whatever; juhosi--you offer; dadasi--you give away; yat--whatever; yat--whatever; tapasyasi--austerities you perform; kaunteya--O son ofKunti; tat--that; kurusva--make; mat--unto Me; arpanam--offering.
TRANSLATIONO son of Kunti, all that you do, all that you eat, all that you offer
and give away, as well as all austerities that you may perform, shouldbe done as an offering unto Me.
PURPORTThus, it is the duty of everyone to mold his life in such a way that he
will not forget Krsna in any circumstance. Everyone has to work formaintenance of his body and soul together, and Krsna recommends hereinthat one should work for Him. Everyone has to eat something to live;therefore he should accept the remnants of foodstuffs offered to Krsna.Any civilized man has to perform some religious ritualistic ceremonies;therefore Krsna recommends, "Do it for Me," and this is called arcana.Everyone has a tendency to give something in charity; Krsna says, "Giveit to Me," and this means that all surplus money accumulated should beutilized in furthering the Krsna consciousness movement. Nowadayspeople are very much inclined to the meditational process, which is notpractical in this age, but if anyone practices meditating on Krsnatwenty-four hours by chanting the Hare Krsna mantra round his beads, heis surely the greatest yogi. as substantiated by the Sixth Chapter ofBhagavad-gita.
TEXT 28
subhasubha-phalair evam
moksyase karma-bandhanaihsannyasa-yoga-yuktatmavimukto mam upaisyasi
SYNONYMSsubha--good; asubha--evil; phalaih--results; evam--thus; moksyase--
free; karma--action; bandhanaih--bondage; sannyasa--of renunciation;yoga--the yoga; yukta-atma--having the mind firmly set on; vimuktah--liberated; mam--to Me; upaisyasi--you will attain.
TRANSLATION
In this way you will be freed from all reactions to good and evil
deeds, and by this principle of renunciation you will be liberated andcome to Me.
PURPORTOne who acts in Krsna consciousness under superior direction is called
yukta. The technical term is yukta-vairagya. This is further explainedby Rupa Gosvami as follows:
anasaktasya visayan
yatharham upayunjatahnirbandhah krsna-sambandheyuktam vairagyam ucyate
(Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 2.255)
Rupa Gosvami says that as long as we are in this material world we haveto act; we cannot cease acting. Therefore if actions are performed andthe fruits are given to Krsna, then that is called yukta-vairagya.Actually situated in renunciation, such activities clear the mirror ofthe mind, and as the actor gradually makes progress in spiritualrealization he becomes completely surrendered to the SupremePersonality of Godhead. Therefore at the end he becomes liberated, andthis liberation is also specified. By this liberation he does notbecome one with the brahmajyoti, but rather enters into the planet ofthe Supreme Lord. It is clearly mentioned here: mam upaisyasi, "hecomes to Me," back home, back to Godhead. There are five differentstages of liberation, and here it is specified that the devotee who hasalways lived his lifetime here under the direction of the Supreme Lord,as stated, has evolved to the point where he can after quitting thisbody, go back to Godhead and engage directly in the association of theSupreme Lord.Anyone who has no other interest but to dedicate his life to theservice of the Lord is actually a sannyasi. Such a person always thinksof himself as an eternal servant, dependent on the supreme will of theLord. As such, whatever he does, he does it for the benefit of theLord. Whatever action he performs, he performs it as service to theLord. He does not give serious attention to the fruitive activities orprescribed duties mentioned in the Vedas. For ordinary persons it isobligatory to execute the prescribed duties mentioned in the Vedas, butalthough a pure devotee who is completely engaged in the service of theLord may sometimes appear to go against the prescribed Vedic duties,actually it is not so.It is said, therefore, by Vaisnava authorities that even the mostintelligent person cannot understand the plans and activities of a puredevotee. The exact words are tanra vakya, kriya, mudra vijneha nabujhaya (Caitanya-caritamrta, Madhya 23.39). A person who is thusalways engaged in the service of the Lord or is always thinking andplanning how to serve the Lord is to be considered completely liberatedat present and in the future. His going back home, back to Godhead, isguaranteed. He is above all materialistic criticism, just as Krsna isabove all criticism.
TEXT 29
samo 'ham sarva-bhutesu
na me dvesyo 'sti na priyahye bhajanti tu mam bhaktya
mayi te tesu capy aham
SYNONYMSsamah--equally disposed; aham--I; sarva-bhutesu--to all living
entities; na--no one; me--Mine; dvesyah--hateful; asti--is; na--nor;priyah--dear; ye--those; bhajanti--render transcendental service; tu--yet; mam--unto Me; bhaktya--in devotion; mayi--unto Me; te--suchpersons; tesu--in them; ca--also; api--certainly; aham--I.
TRANSLATIONI envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But
whoever renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me, andI am also a friend to him.
PURPORTOne may question here that if Krsna is equal to everyone and no one is
His special friend, then why does He take a special interest in thedevotees who are always engaged in His transcendental service? But thisis not discrimination; it is natural. Any man in this material worldmay be very charitably disposed, yet he has a special interest in hisown children. The Lord claims that every living entity--in whateverform is His son, and as such He provides everyone with a generoussupply of the necessities of life. He is just like a cloud which poursrain all over, regardless of whether it falls on rock or land or water.But for His devotees, He gives specific attention. Such devotees arementioned here: they are always in Krsna consciousness, and thereforethey are always transcendentally situated in Krsna. The very phrase"Krsna consciousness" suggests that those who are in such consciousnessare living transcendentalists, situated in Him. The Lord says heredistinctly, mayi te, "in Me." Naturally, as a result, the Lord is alsoin them. This is reciprocal. This also explains the words ye yatha mamprapadyante tams tathaiva bhajamy aham: "Whoever surrenders unto Me,proportionately I take care of him." This transcendental reciprocationexists because both the Lord and the devotee are conscious. When adiamond is set in a golden ring, it looks very nice. The gold isglorified, and at the same time the diamond is glorified. The Lord andthe living entity eternally glitter, and when a living entity becomesinclined to the service of the Supreme Lord he looks like gold. TheLord is a diamond, and so this combination is very nice. Livingentities in a pure state are called devotees. The Supreme Lord becomesthe devotee of His devotees. If a reciprocal relationship is notpresent between the devotee and the Lord, then there is no personalistphilosophy. In the impersonal philosophy there is no reciprocationbetween the Supreme and the living entity, but in the personalistphilosophy there is.The example is often given that the Lord is like a desire tree, andwhatever one wants from this desire tree, the Lord supplies. But herethe explanation is more complete. The Lord is here stated to be partialto the devotees. This is the manifestation of the Lord's special mercyto the devotees. The Lord's reciprocation should not be considered tobe under the law of karma. It belongs to the transcendental situationin which the Lord and His devotees function. Devotional service of theLord is not an activity of this material world; it is part of thespiritual world, where eternity, bliss and knowledge predominate.
TEXT 30
api cet su-duracaro
bhajate mam ananya-bhaksadhur eva sa mantavyahsamyag vyavasito hi sah
SYNONYMSapi--in spite of; cet--although; su-duracarah--one committing the most
abominable actions; bhajate--engaged in devotional service; mam--untoMe; ananya-bhak--without deviation; sadhuh--saint; eva--certainly; sah--he; mantavyah--to be considered; samyak--completely; vyavasitah--situated; hi--certainly; sah--he.
TRANSLATIONEven if one commits the most abominable actions, if he is engaged in
devotional service, he is to be considered saintly because he isproperly situated.
PURPORTThe word su-duracarah used in this verse is very significant, and we
should understand it properly. When a living entity is conditioned, hehas two kinds of activities: one is conditional, and the other isconstitutional. As for protecting the body or abiding by the rules ofsociety and state, certainly there are different activities, even forthe devotees, in connection with the conditional life, and suchactivities are called conditional. Besides these, the living entity whois fully conscious of his spiritual nature and is engaged in Krsnaconsciousness, or the devotional service of the Lord, has activitieswhich are called transcendental. Such activities are performed in hisconstitutional position, and they are technically called devotionalservice. Now, in the conditioned state, sometimes devotional serviceand the conditional service in relation to the body will parallel oneanother. But then again, sometimes these activities become opposed toone another. As far as possible, a devotee is very cautious so that hedoes not do anything that could disrupt his wholesome condition. Heknows that perfection in his activities depends on his progressiverealization of Krsna consciousness. Sometimes, however, it may be seenthat a person in Krsna consciousness commits some act which may betaken as most abominable socially or politically. But such a temporaryfalldown does not disqualify him. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is statedthat if a person falls down but is wholeheartedly engaged in thetranscendental service of the Supreme Lord, the Lord, being situatedwithin his heart, beautifies him and excuses him from that abomination.The material contamination is so strong that even a yogi fully engagedin the service of the Lord sometimes becomes ensnared; but Krsnaconsciousness is so strong that such an occasional falldown is at oncerectified. Therefore the process of devotional service is always asuccess. No one should deride a devotee for some accidental falldownfrom the ideal path, for, as is explained in the next verse, suchoccasional falldowns will be stopped in due course, as soon as adevotee is completely situated in Krsna consciousness.Therefore a person who is situated in Krsna consciousness and isengaged with determination in the process of chanting Hare Krsna, HareKrsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare
Hare should be considered to be in the transcendental position, even if
by chance or accident he is found to have fallen. The words sadhur eva,"he is saintly," are very emphatic. They are a warning to thenondevotees that because of an accidental falldown a devotee should notbe derided; he should still be considered saintly even if he has fallendown accidentally. And the word mantavyah is still more emphatic. Ifone does not follow this rule, and derides a devotee for his accidentalfalldown, then he is disobeying the order of the Supreme Lord. The onlyqualification of a devotee is to be unflinchingly and exclusivelyengaged in devotional service.The mark of a spot which may be seen on the moon does not become animpediment to the moonlight. Similarly, the accidental falldown of adevotee from the path of a saintly character does not make himabominable. On the other hand, one should not misunderstand that adevotee in transcendental devotional service can act in all kinds ofabominable ways; this verse only refers to an accident due to thestrong power of material connections. Devotional service is more orless a declaration of war against the illusory energy. As long as oneis not strong enough to fight the illusory energy, there may beaccidental falldowns. But when one is strong enough, he is no longersubjected to such falldowns, as previously explained. No one shouldtake advantage of this verse and commit nonsense and think that he isstill a devotee. If he does not improve in his character by devotionalservice, then it is to be understood that he is not a high devotee.
TEXT 31
ksipram bhavati dharmatma
sasvac-chantim nigacchatikaunteya pratijanihina me bhaktah pranasyati
SYNONYMSksipram--very soon; bhavati--becomes; dharma-atma--righteous; sasvat-
santim--lasting peace; nigacchati--attains; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;pratijanihi--justly declare; na--never; me--Mine; bhaktah--devotees;pranasyati--perishes.
TRANSLATIONHe quickly becomes righteous and attains lasting peace. O son of Kunti,
declare it boldly that My devotee never perishes.
PURPORTThis should not be misunderstood. In the Seventh Chapter the Lord says
that one who is engaged in mischievous activities cannot become adevotee of the Lord. One who is not a devotee of the Lord has no goodqualifications whatsoever. The question remains, then, How can a personengaged in abominable activities--either by accident or intention--be apure devotee? This question may justly be raised. The miscreants, asstated in the Seventh Chapter, who never come to the devotional serviceof the Lord, have no good qualifications, as is stated in the Srimad-Bhagavatam. Generally, a devotee who is engaged in the nine kinds ofdevotional activities is engaged in the process of cleansing allmaterial contamination from the heart. He puts the Supreme Personalityof Godhead within his heart, and all sinful contaminations are
naturally washed away. Continuous thinking of the Supreme Lord makes
him pure by nature. According to the Vedas, there is a certainregulation that if one falls down from his exalted position, he has toundergo certain ritualistic processes to purify himself. But here thereis no such condition because the purifying process is already there inthe heart of the devotee, due to his remembering the SupremePersonality of Godhead constantly. Therefore, the chanting of HareKrsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, RamaRama, Hare Hare should be continued without stoppage. This will protecta devotee from all accidental falldowns. He will thus remainperpetually free from all material contaminations.
TEXT 32
mam hi partha vyapasritya
ye 'pi syuh papa-yonayahstriyo vaisyas tatha sudraste 'pi yanti param gatim
SYNONYMSmam--unto Me; hi--certainly; partha--O son of Prtha; vyapasritya--
particularly taking shelter; ye--anyone; api--also; syuh--becomes;papa-yonayah--born of a lower family; striyah--women; vaisyah--mercantile people; tatha--also; sudrah--lower-class men; te api--eventhey; yanti--go; param--supreme; gatim--destination.
TRANSLATIONO son of Prtha, those who take shelter in Me, though they be of lower
birth--women, vaisyas [merchants], as well as sudras [workers]--canapproach the supreme destination.
PURPORTIt is clearly declared here by the Supreme Lord that in devotional
service there is no distinction between the lower or higher classes ofpeople. In the material conception of life, there are such divisions,but for a person engaged in transcendental devotional service to theLord, there are not. Everyone is eligible for the supreme destination.In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (2.4.18) it is stated that even the lowest,who are called candalas (dog-eaters), can be elevated by associationwith a pure devotee. Therefore devotional service and guidance of apure devotee are so strong that there is no discrimination between thelower and higher classes of men; anyone can take to it. The most simpleman taking shelter of the pure devotee can be purified by properguidance. According to the different modes of material nature, men areclassified in the mode of goodness (brahmanas), the mode of passion(ksatriyas, or administrators), the mixed modes of passion andignorance (vaisyas, or merchants), and the mode of ignorance (sudras,or workers). Those lower than them are called candalas, and they areborn in sinful families. Generally, those who are born in sinfulfamilies are not accepted by the higher classes. But the process ofdevotional service and the pure devotee of the Supreme God are sostrong that all the lower classes can attain the highest perfection oflife. This is possible only when one takes shelter of Krsna. One has totake shelter completely of Krsna. Then one can become much greater thangreat jnanis and yogis.
TEXT 33
kim punar brahmanah punya
bhakta rajarsayas tathaanityam asukham lokamimam prapya bhajasva mam
SYNONYMSkim--how much; punah--again; brahmanah--brahmanas; punyah--righteous;
bhaktah--devotees; raja-rsayah--saintly kings; tatha--also; anityam--temporary; asukham--sorrowful; lokam--planet; imam--this; prapya--gaining; bhajasva--are engaged in loving service; mam--unto Me.
TRANSLATIONHow much greater then are the brahmanas, the righteous, the devotees
and saintly kings who in this temporary miserable world engage inloving service unto Me.
PURPORTIn this material world there are classifications of people, but, after
all, this world is not a happy place for anyone. It is clearly statedhere, anityam asukham lokam: this world is temporary and full ofmiseries, not habitable for any sane gentleman. This world is declaredby the Supreme Personality of Godhead to be temporary and full ofmiseries. Some of the philosophers, especially the minor philosophers,say that this world is false, but we can understand from Bhagavad-gitathat the world is not false; it is temporary. There is a differencebetween temporary and false. This world is temporary, but there isanother world, which is eternal. This world is miserable, but the otherworld is eternal and blissful.Arjuna was born in a saintly royal family. To him also the Lord says,"Take to My devotional service and come quickly back to Godhead, backhome." No one should remain in this temporary world, full as it is withmiseries. Everyone should attach himself to the bosom of the SupremePersonality of Godhead so that he can be eternally happy. Thedevotional service of the Supreme Lord is the only process by which allproblems of all classes of men can be solved. Everyone should thereforetake to Krsna consciousness and make his life perfect.
TEXT 34
man-mana bhava mad-bhakto
mad-yaji mam namaskurumam evaisyasi yuktvaivamatmanam mat-parayanah
SYNONYMSmat-manah--always thinking of Me; bhava--become; mat--My; bhaktah--
devotee; mat--My; yaji--worshiper; mam--unto Me; namaskuru--offerobeisances; mam--unto Me; eva--completely; esyasi--come; yuktva evam--being absorbed; atmanam--your soul; mat-parayanah--devoted to Me.
TRANSLATION
Engage your mind always in thinking of Me, offer obeisances and worship
Me. Being completely absorbed in Me, surely you will come to Me.
PURPORTIn this verse it is clearly indicated that Krsna consciousness is the
only means of being delivered from the clutches of this contaminatedmaterial world. Sometimes unscrupulous commentators distort the meaningof what is clearly stated here: that all devotional service should beoffered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. Unfortunately,unscrupulous commentators divert the mind of the reader to that whichis not at all feasible. Such commentators do not know that there is nodifference between Krsna's mind and Krsna. Krsna is not an ordinaryhuman being; He is Absolute Truth. His body, mind and He Himself areone and absolute. It is stated in the Kurma Purana, as it is quoted byBhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami in his Anubhasya comments on theCaitanya-caritamrta (Fifth Chapter, Adi-lila, verses 41-48), deha-dehi-vibhedo 'yam nesvare vidyate kvacit. This means that there is nodifference in Krsna, the Supreme Lord, between Himself and His body.But, because they do not know this science of Krsna, the commentatorshide Krsna and divide His personality from His mind or from His body.Although this is sheer ignorance of the science of Krsna, some men makeprofit out of misleading the people.There are some who are demonic; they also think of Krsna, butenviously, just like King Kamsa, Krsna's uncle. He was also thinking ofKrsna always, but he thought of Krsna as his enemy. He was always inanxiety, wondering when Krsna would come to kill him. That kind ofthinking will not help us. One should be thinking of Krsna indevotional love. That is bhakti. One should cultivate the knowledge ofKrsna continually. What is that favorable cultivation? It is to learnfrom a bona fide teacher. Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,and we have several times explained that His body is not material, butis eternal, blissful knowledge. This kind of talk about Krsna will helpone become a devotee. Otherwise, understanding Krsna from the wrongsource will prove fruitless.One should therefore engage his mind in the eternal form, the primalform of Krsna; with conviction in his heart that Krsna is the Supreme,he should engage himself in worship. There are hundreds of thousands oftemples in India for the worship of Krsna, and devotional service ispracticed there. When such practice is made, one has to offerobeisances to Krsna. One should lower his head before the Deity andengage his mind, his body, his activities--everything. That will makeone fully absorbed in Krsna without deviation. This will help onetransfer into the Krsnaloka. One should not be deviated by unscrupulouscommentators. One must engage in the nine different processes ofdevotional service, beginning with hearing and chanting about Krsna.Pure devotional service is the highest achievement of human society.In the Seventh and Eighth chapters of Bhagavad-gita, pure devotionalservice to the Lord has been explained, apart from the yoga ofknowledge and mystic yoga or fruitive activities. Those who are notpurely sanctified may be attracted by different features of the Lord,like the impersonal brahmajyoti and localized Paramatma, but a puredevotee directly takes to the service of the Supreme Lord.There is a beautiful poem about Krsna in which it is clearly statedthat any person who is engaged in the worship of demigods is mostunintelligent and cannot achieve at any time the supreme award ofKrsna. The devotee, in the beginning, may sometimes fall from the
