Name: ___________________________________________ Date: ___________________
Bhagavad-Gita chapter-4
1. the history of the Bhagavad-gītā traced from a remote time when it was delivered to the royal order of all planets? BG 4.1
Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇ a instructed this imperishable science of yoga to the sun-god, Vivasvān, and Vivasvān instructed it to Manu, the
father of mankind, and Manu in turn instructed it to Ik ṣ vāku.
2. Which god is known as Vivasvān? BG 4.1
A. Sun  B. moon
C. Agni D. Indra
3. Which planet is the king of all planets? BG 4.1
A. Moon B. Sun 
C. Jupitor D. Saturn
4. Which yuga this science of the relationship with the Supreme was delivered by Vivasvān to Manu? BG 4.1
Treta-yuga
5. At the present moment we have just passed through how many years in Kali-yuga? BG 4.1
A. 5000yrs  B. 3000yrs
C. 8000yrs D. 4000yrs
6. How many years Kali-yuga will last? BG 4.1
Kali-yuga lasts 432,000 years.
7. Which Yuga was before Kali-yuga? BG 4.1
Dvāpara-yuga
8. Dvāpara-yuga last for howmany years? BG 4.1
800,000 years
9. Which Yuga was before Dvāpara-yuga? BG 4.1
Tretā-yuga
10. Howmany years Tretā-yuga last for? BG 4.1
1,200,000 years
11. The age of the current Manu is calculated to last for how many years? BG 4.1
305,300,000 years
12. What is the rough estimate is that the Gītā was spoken at least how many years back? BG 4.1
120,400,000 years ago
13. Why Bhagavadgita was spoken to the sun-god Vivasvān? BG 4.1
because he is also a k ṣ atriya and is the father of all k ṣ atriyas who are descendants of the sun-god, or the sūrya-va ṁ śa k ṣ atriyas.
14. How many years back Bhagavadgita was first spoken? with whom? BG 4.1
Bhagavad-gītā was spoken at least 120,400,000 years ago by Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇ a to sun-god Vivasvān
15. When the Bhagavad-gītā again was respoken with whom? BG 4.1
It was respoken by the Lord again to Arjuna about ﬁve thousand years ago.
16. Why 2nd time Gita was spoken by Lord Krishna? BG 4.2
Five thousand years ago it was detected by the Lord Himself that the disciplic succession was broken, and therefore He declared
that the purpose of the Gītā appeared to be lost.
17. How many classes of men are there? BG 4.3
There are two classes of men
18. Name two classes of men? BG 4.3
namely the devotee and the demon.
19. Why Lord selected Arjuna as the recipient of this great science? BG 4.3
Because Arjuna was devotee of the Lord
20. Arjuna is an accepted devotee of the Lord, so how could he not believe K ṛṣṇ a’s words? BG 4.4
The fact is that Arjuna is not inquiring for himself but for those who do not believe in the Supreme Personality of Godhead or for
the demons who do not like the idea that K ṛṣṇ a should be accepted as the Supreme Personality of Godhead; for them only Arjuna
inquires on this point,
21. Arjuna said: The sun-god Vivasvān is senior by birth to You. How am I to understand that in the beginning You instructed this science to him?BG 4.4-4.5
The Personality of Godhead said: Many, many births both you and I have passed. I can remember all of them, but you cannot, O
subduer of the enemy!
22. What is the meaning of The Lord is described in the Brahma-sa ṁ hitā as infallible ? BG 4.5
which means that He never forgets Himself, even though He is in material contact. Therefore, the Lord and the living entity can
never be equal in all respects,
23. How a living entity forgets everything of his past? BG 4.5
due to his change of body,
24. How the Lord remembers everything? BG 4.5
because He does not change His sac-cid-ānanda body. He is advaita, which means there is no distinction between His body and
Himself. Everything in relation to Him is spirit
25. What is meaning of prak ṛ ti? BG 4.6
Prak ṛ ti means “nature,” as well as svarūpa, or “one’s own form.
26. The word s ṛ jāmi is signiﬁcant herein? BG 4.7
S ṛjāmi cannot be used in the sense of creation, because, according to the previous verse, there is no creation of the Lord’s form
or body, since all of the forms are eternally existent. Therefore, s ṛ jāmi means that the Lord manifests Himself as He is.
27. When Lord will appears ? BG 4.7
He therefore appears by His own will whenever there is a predominance of irreligiosity and a disappearance of true religion.
28. How Lord will appear in this world? Bg 4.7
He descends personally, and sometimes He sends His bona ﬁde representative in the form of His son, or servant, or Himself in
some disguised form.
29. What kind of a person is accepted as a sādhu? BG 4.8
a person who is one hundred percent engaged in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness is accepted as a sādhu,
30. Who is Prahlāda? BG 4.8
Prahlāda Mahārāja was the son of Hira ṇ yakaśipu
31. Who is Devakī`s brother? Bg 4.8
Ka ṁsa
32. Why it is said here that to deliver the devotee and vanquish the demon miscreants, the Lord appears in different incarnations? BG 4.8
So Lord K ṛṣṇ a appeared primarily to deliver Devakī rather than kill Ka ṁ sa, but both were performed simultaneously.
33. What is incarnation, or avatāra? BG 4.8
the particular form of the Personality of Godhead who so descends is called an incarnation, or avatāra.
34. The Lord says that He incarnates Himself in every millennium. This indicates that He incarnates also in the Age of Kali? BG 4.8
TRUE  FALSE
35. What is the incarnation in the Age of Kali? BG 4.8
the incarnation in the Age of Kali is Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu,
36. How he spread K ṛṣṇ a consciousness throughout India? BG 4.8
He spread the worship of K ṛṣṇ a by the sa ṅ kīrtana movement (congregational chanting of the holy names) and spread K ṛṣṇ a
consciousness throughout India
37. What kind of devotees does not run the risk of returning to this material world? BG 4.9
the devotee, simply by understanding the transcendental nature of the body and activities of the Lord, attains the abode of the
Lord after ending this body and does not run the risk of returning to this material world.
38. What is the way to achieve this perfection? BG 4.9
One can attain the perfect stage of liberation from birth and death simply by knowing the Lord, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and there is no other way to achieve this perfection.
39. What are the three stages of material consciousness? BG 4.10
Some people are too materially attached and therefore do not give attention to spiritual life, some of them want to merge into
the supreme spiritual cause, and some of them disbelieve in everything, being angry at all sorts of spiritual speculation out of
hopelessness.
40. What is called bhāva ? BG 4.10
The last stage of the devotional life is called bhāva, or transcendental love of Godhead.
41. What is called prema? BG 4.10
Real love for God is called prema
42. How one can ultimately attain to the abode of the Supreme Lord? BG 4.10
being freed from all material attachment, from the fearfulness of one’s individual spiritual personality, and from the frustrations
that result in void philosophy.
43. How Everyone is searching for K ṛṣṇ a? BG 4.11
Everyone is searching for K ṛṣṇ a in the different aspects of His manifestations.
44. What all the forms devotee may want K ṛṣṇ a as ? BG 4.11
One devotee may want K ṛṣṇ a as supreme master, another as his personal friend, another as his son and still another as his lover.
K ṛṣṇa rewards all the devotees equally,
45. Is demigods different forms of God? BG 4.12
Actually, the demigods are not different forms of God, but they are God’s different parts and parcels. God is one,
46. Who is called atheist, or pā ṣ a ṇḍ ī? BG 4.12
Anyone who thinks that God and the demigods are on the same level is called an atheist, or pā ṣ a ṇḍ ī.
47. How many divisions of the social order god created? BG 4.13
A. 5 B. 4 
C. 3 D. 6
48. What is the first class of men god created? BG 4.13
beginning with the intelligent class of men, technically called brāhma ṇ as due to their being situated in the mode of goodness.
49. What is the second class of men god created? BG 4.13
Next is the administrative class, technically called the k ṣ atriyas due to their being situated in the mode of passion.
50. What is the third class of men god created? BG 4.13
The mercantile men, called the vaiśyas, are situated in the mixed modes of passion and ignorance,
51. What is the forth class of men god created? BG 4.13
the śūdras, or laborer class, are situated in the ignorant mode of material nature.
52. How the king is not subject to the state laws? BG 4.14
As there are constitutional laws in the material world stating that the king can do no wrong, or that the king is not subject to the
state laws,
53. How Lord is not affected by the activities of the material world? BG 4.14
the Lord, although He is the creator of this material world, is not affected by the activities of the material world. He creates and
remains aloof from the creation,
54. Who is responsible for his own acts? Bg 4.14
The living entity is responsible for his own acts.
55. What are the two classes of men Lord mentioned in BG 4.15
Some of them are full of polluted material things within their hearts, and some of them are materially free.
56. How the two classes of men can clense themselves? BG 4.15
Those who are full of dirty things can take to the line of K ṛṣṇ a consciousness for a gradual cleansing process, following the
regulative principles of devotional service. Those who are already cleansed of the impurities may continue to act in the same
K ṛṣṇa consciousness so that others may follow their exemplary activities and thereby be beneﬁted.
57. How anyone who follows in the footsteps of Arjuna is certainly not bewildered? BG 4.16
Because of the direct instruction of the Lord to Arjuna,
58. Can any one manufacture a religious principle by imperfect speculation? BG 4.16
No one can manufacture a religious principle by imperfect speculation.
59. How One must follow in the footsteps of great authorities like? BG 4.16
One must follow in the footsteps of great authorities like Brahmā, Śiva, Nārada, Manu, the Kumāras, Kapila, Prahlāda, Bhī ṣ ma,
Śukadeva Gosvāmī, Yamarāja, Janaka and Bali Mahārāja.
60. out of causeless mercy to His devotees what Lord explains directly to Arjuna? BG 4.16
what action is and what inaction is. Only action performed in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness can deliver a person from the entanglement of
material existence.
61. If one is serious about liberation from material bondage what he has to understand? BG 4.17
one has to understand the distinctions between action, inaction and unauthorized actions. One has to apply oneself to such an
analysis of action, reaction and perverted actions because it is a very difﬁcult subject matter. To understand K ṛṣṇ a consciousness
62. What is vikarmas, or prohibited actions? BG 4.17
The entire Bhagavad-gītā is directed toward this conclusion. Any other conclusions against this consciousness and its attendant
actions are vikarmas, or prohibited actions.
63. Who is intelligent among men? BG 4.18
One who sees inaction in action and action in inaction is intelligent among men,
64. Who is free from the bonds of karma? BG 4.18
A person acting in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness is naturally free from the bonds of karma.
65. What is Akarma means? BG 4.18
Akarma means without reaction to work.
66. What is compared to ﬁre? BG 4.19
Development of this knowledge of eternal servitorship to the Lord is compared to ﬁre. Such a ﬁre, once kindled, can burn up all
kinds of reactions to work.
67. Who has no attraction for the results of the action? BG 4.20
A K ṛṣṇ a conscious person acts out of pure love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore he has no attraction for
the results of the action.
68. What is the sign of akarma, or actions without fruitive reactions? BG 4.20
He does his duty to the best of his ability and leaves everything to K ṛṣṇ a. Such an unattached person is always free from the
resultant reactions of good and bad; it is as though he were not doing anything. This is the sign of akarma, or actions without
fruitive reactions.
69. How A K ṛṣṇ a conscious person actions are? Bg 4.21
A K ṛṣṇ a conscious person does not expect good or bad results in his activities. His mind and intelligence are fully controlled. He
knows that because he is part and parcel of the Supreme, the part played by him,
70. How a krishna consios person independent in his livelihood? BG 4.22
He neither begs nor borrows, but he labors honestly as far as is in his power, and is satisﬁed with whatever is obtained by his own
honest labor. He is therefore independent in his livelihood.
71. How a duality of the material world is felt? BG 4.22
The duality of the material world is felt in terms of heat and cold, or misery and happiness.
72. who is the primeval Vi ṣṇ u? BG 4.23
Lord K ṛṣṇ a
73. The process by which the conditioned soul can get out of the material atmosphere is K ṛṣṇ a consciousness give example? BG 4.24
a patient who is suffering from a disorder of the bowels due to overindulgence in milk products is cured by another milk product,
namely curds. The materially absorbed conditioned soul can be cured by K ṛṣṇ a consciousness as set forth here in the Gītā.
74. What is brahma-jyotir? BG 4.24
The Lord is spiritual, and the rays of His transcendental body are called brahma-jyotir
75. Who is also called a perfect yogī or a ﬁrst-class mystic? BG 4.25
a person engaged in discharging duties in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness is also called a perfect yogī or a ﬁrst-class mystic.
76. What are the two primary divisions of sacriﬁce? BG 4.25
sacriﬁce of worldly possessions and sacriﬁce in pursuit of transcendental knowledge.
77. Who are called bahv-īśvara-vādī? BG 4.25
Those who are interested in material beneﬁts worship the demigods by various sacriﬁces according to the Vedic rituals. They are
called bahv-īśvara-vādī, or believers in many gods.
78. Name The members of the four divisions of human life? BG 4.26
namely the brahmacārī, the g ṛ hastha, the vānaprastha and the sannyāsī,
79. How the pure brahmacārī engages? BG 4.26
chanting and hearing the glories of the Lord. He restrains himself from the vibrations of material sounds, and his hearing is
engaged in the transcendental sound vibration of Hare K ṛṣṇ a, Hare K ṛṣṇ a.
80. How general tendency of householders or g ṛ hastha engages? BG 4.26
the restricted householder sacriﬁces his general tendency toward sense gratiﬁcation for higher, transcendental life.
81. What is soul is called In the Yoga-sūtra of Patañjali? BG 4.27
pratyag-ātmā and parāg-ātmā.
82. What is parāg-ātmā? BG 4.27
As long as the soul is attached to sense enjoyment it is called parāg-ātmā
83. What is pratyag-ātmā? BG 4.27
as soon as the same soul becomes detached from such sense enjoyment it is called pratyag-ātmā.
84. What is called dravyamaya-yajña? BG 4.28
there are many hospitals, old age homes and similar charitable foundations meant for distributing food, education and medical
treatment free to the poor. All these charitable activities are called dravyamaya-yajña.
85. What is called tapomaya-yajña? BG 4.28
For example, under the cāturmāsya vow the candidate does not shave for four months during the year (July to October), he does
not eat certain foods, does not eat twice in a day or does not leave home. Such sacriﬁce of the comforts of life is called
tapomaya-yajña.
86. What is called yoga-yajña? Bg 4.28
some travel to all the sanctiﬁed places of pilgrimage. All these practices are called yoga-yajña
87. What is called svādhyāya-yajña? BG 4.28
There are others who engage themselves in the studies of different Vedic literatures, speciﬁcally the Upani ṣ ads and Vedānta-
sūtras, or the Sā ṅ khya philosophy. All of these are called svādhyāya-yajña,
88. What is called prā ṇ āyāma? BG 4.29
This system of yoga for controlling the breathing process is called prā ṇ āyāma
89. What is called kumbhaka-yoga? BG 4.29
When inhale and exhale air both air currents are completely stopped, one is said to be in kumbhaka-yoga
90. How a yogīs increase the duration of life? BG 4.29
by practicing kumbhaka-yoga, the yogīs increase the duration of life by many, many years.
91. How Reducing the eating process is very helpful in the matter of sense control.? BG 4.29
The practice of reduced eating is automatically done when one eats only k ṛṣṇ a-prasādam, or food which is offered ﬁrst to the
Lord.
92. Name the different types of sacriﬁce? BG 4.30
namely sacriﬁce of one’s possessions, study of the Vedas or philosophical doctrines, and performance of the yoga system
93. What is the solution to all the problems of material existence? BG 4.31
A life of K ṛṣṇ a consciousness is therefore the solution to all the problems of material existence.
94. What is conﬁrmed by the Lord herewith from His own mouth? BG 4.32
men are so deeply absorbed in the bodily concept, these sacriﬁces are so arranged that one can work either with the body, with
the mind or with the intelligence. But all of them are recommended for ultimately bringing about liberation from the body.
95. What is called karma-kā ṇḍ a? BG 4.33
sacriﬁcial activities are sometimes called karma-kā ṇḍ a (fruitive activities)
96. What is jñāna-kā ṇḍ a? BG 4.33
knowledge in the pursuit of truth). It is better when the end is knowledge
97. Why Lord therefore advises us to approach a bona ﬁde spiritual master? BG 4.34
The Lord therefore advises us to approach a bona ﬁde spiritual master in the line of disciplic succession from the Lord Himself.
98. Why Arjuna thought that the temporary bodily relationship with his kinsmen was more important than his eternal spiritual relationship with K ṛṣṇ a? BG 4.35
By māyā
99. How the swimmer from the ocean can be saved? BG 4.36
If someone comes forward and lifts the struggling swimmer from the ocean, he is the greatest savior.
100. he boat of K ṛṣṇ a consciousness is very simple, but at the same time the most sublime.
TRUE  FALSE
101. In which situation sacriﬁce becomes material? BG 4.42
If sacriﬁce of one’s material possessions is not dovetailed for spiritual realization, then such sacriﬁce becomes material.
102. In which situation it will become perfect sacriﬁce? BG 4.42
But one who performs such sacriﬁces with a spiritual objective, or in devotional service, makes a perfect sacriﬁce.
