9/21/2018 Bhagavad gita chapter-18 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/914129 1/6Name: ___________________________________________ Date: ___________________
Bhagavad gita chapter-18
1. Who is the composer of the Vedānta-sūtra? BG 18.1
the Lord Himself is the composer of the Vedānta-sūtra, and He is its knower.
2. What is The purpose of life? BG 18.1
The purpose of life is indicated to be renunciation and attainment of the
transcendental position above the three material modes of nature.
3. What Arjuna wants to clarify from Lord Krishna? BG 18.1
Arjuna wants to clarify the two distinct subject matters of Bhagavad-gītā, namely
renunciation (tyāga) and the renounced order of life (sannyāsa). Thus he is asking the
meaning of these two words.
4. Whom the doubts are always compared to? BG 18.1
doubts are always compared to demons.
5. Why K ṛṣṇ a is known as Keśi-ni ṣ ūdana? BG 18.1
Keśī was a most formidable demon who was killed by the Lord; now Arjuna is expecting
K ṛṣṇa to kill the demon of doubt.
6. What is call the renounced order of life [sannyāsa]? BG 18.2
The giving up of activities that are based on material desire is what great learned men
call the renounced order of life [sannyāsa].
7. What is call renunciation [tyāga]? BG 18.2
giving up the results of all activities is what the wise call renunciation [tyāga].
8. What activity should not to be given up? BG 18.2
But activities leading to advanced spiritual knowledge are not to be given up. sacriﬁce
for the puriﬁcation of one’s heart or for advancement in the spiritual science should not
be given up.
9. What is recommended in the Vedic literature? BG 18.3
animal killing in a sacriﬁce is recommended in the Vedic literature, the animal is not
considered to be killed. The sacriﬁce is to give a new life to the animal. Sometimes the
animal is given a new animal life after being killed in the sacriﬁce, and sometimes the
animal is promoted immediately to the human form of life.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad gita chapter-18 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/914129 2/610. What is Śrī K ṛṣṇ a, judgment about renunciation? BG 18.4
Here the Lord is personally present, and His word should be taken as ﬁnal. The Lord
says that the process of renunciation should be considered in terms of the modes of
material nature in which it is performed.
11. What Lord says about vivāha-yajña or marriage ceremony? BG 18.5
The Lord says here that any sacriﬁce which is meant for human welfare should never be
given up. Vivāha-yajña, the marriage ceremony, is meant to regulate the human mind
so that it may become peaceful for spiritual advancement. For most men, this vivāha-
yajña should be encouraged even by persons in the renounced order of life.
12. What Lord says about Sannyāsīs? BG 18.5
Sannyāsīs should never associate with women, but that does not mean that one who is
in the lower stages of life, a young man, should not accept a wife in the marriage
ceremony. All prescribed sacriﬁces are meant for achieving the Supreme Lord.
Therefore, in the lower stages, they should not be given up.
13. What Lord says asbout charity? BG 18.5
charity is for the puriﬁcation of the heart. If charity is given to suitable persons, as
described previously, it leads one to advanced spiritual life.
14. Why all sacriﬁces which are meant for material advancement in life should be given up? Bg 18.6
Although all sacriﬁces are purifying, one should not expect any result by such
performances. In other words, all sacriﬁces which are meant for material advancement
in life should be given up,
15. Why any activity which leads to devotional service to the Lord should be accepted? BG 18.6
sacriﬁces that purify one’s existence and elevate one to the spiritual plane should not
be stopped. Everything that leads to K ṛṣṇ a consciousness must be encouraged. In the
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam also it is said that any activity which leads to devotional service to
the Lord should be accepted.
16. What A devotee of the Lord should accept ? BG 18.6
A devotee of the Lord should accept any kind of work, sacriﬁce or charity which will
help him in the discharge of devotional service to the Lord.
17. Why Cooking for oneself is prohibited? BG 18.7
activities which promote one to spiritual activity, like cooking for the Supreme Lord and
offering the food to the Lord and then accepting the food, are recommended. It is said
that a person in the renounced order of life should not cook for himself. Cooking for
oneself is prohibited, but cooking for the Supreme Lord is not prohibited.
18. When it is to be understood that he is acting in the mode of darkness?BG 18.7
a sannyāsī may perform a marriage ceremony to help his disciple in the advancement of
K ṛṣṇa consciousness. If one renounces such activities, it is to be understood that he is
acting in the mode of darkness.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad gita chapter-18 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/914129 3/619. Why One who is in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness should not give up earning money? BG 18.8
One who is in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness should not give up earning money out of fear that he
is performing fruitive activities. If by working one can engage his money in K ṛṣṇ a
consciousness, or if by rising early in the morning one can advance his transcendental
K ṛṣṇa consciousness
20. What renunciation is in the mode of passion? BG 18.8
one should not desist out of fear or because such activities are considered troublesome.
Such renunciation is in the mode of passion.
21. How Prescribed duties must be performed? BG 18.9
Prescribed duties must be performed with this mentality. One should act without
attachment for the result; he should be disassociated from the modes of work.
22. How A man working in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness in a factory ? BG 18.9
A man working in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness in a factory does not associate himself with the
work of the factory, nor with the workers of the factory. He simply works for K ṛṣṇ a.
And when he gives up the result for K ṛṣṇ a, he is acting transcendentally.
23. Who should be known as most intelligent and beyond all doubts in his activities? BG 18.10
A person in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness or in the mode of goodness does not hate anyone or
anything which troubles his body. He does work in the proper place and at the proper
time without fearing the troublesome effects of his duty. Such a person situated in
transcendence should be understood to be most intelligent and beyond all doubts in his
activities.
24. Who is actually a renouncer according to Bhagavad gita? Bg 18.11
It is said in Bhagavad-gītā that one can never give up work at any time. Therefore he
who works for K ṛṣṇ a and does not enjoy the fruitive results, who offers everything to
K ṛṣṇa, is actually a renouncer.
25. Who are situated in the renounced order of life? BG 18.11
There are many members of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness who
work very hard in their ofﬁce or in the factory or some other place, and whatever they
earn they give to the Society. Such highly elevated souls are actually sannyāsīs and are
situated in the renounced order of life. It is clearly outlined here how to renounce the
fruits of work and for what purpose fruits should be renounced.
26. Who does not enjoy or suffer the results of his acts after death? BG 18.12
A person in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness acting in knowledge of his relationship with K ṛṣṇ a is
always liberated. Therefore he does not have to enjoy or suffer the results of his acts
after death.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad gita chapter-18 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/914129 4/627. how is it that the person in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness does not suffer or enjoy the reactions of work?BG 18.13
The Lord is citing Vedānta philosophy to show how this is possible. He says that there
are ﬁve causes for all activities, and for success in all activity one should consider these
ﬁve causes. Sā ṅ khya means the stock of knowledge, and Vedānta is the ﬁnal stock of
knowledge accepted by all leading ācāryas. Even Śa ṅ kara accepts Vedānta-sūtra as
such. Therefore such authority should be consulted.
28. How The ultimate control is invested in the Supersoul? BG 18.13
Lord is engaging everyone in certain activities by reminding him of his past actions. And
K ṛṣṇa conscious acts done under His direction from within yield no reaction, either in
this life or in the life after death.
29. The word adhi ṣṭ hānam refers to? BG 18.14
The word adhi ṣṭ hānam refers to the body
30. What is known as kartā, “the doer.”? BG 18.14
The soul within the body is acting to bring about the results of activity and is therefore
known as kartā, “the doer.”
31. How by the senses the soul acts in various ways? BG 18.14
For each and every action there is a different endeavor. But all one’s activities depend
on the will of the Supersoul, who is seated within the heart as a friend. The Supreme
Lord is the supercause.
32. Who is not bound by any activity? BG 18.14
The Supreme Lord is the supercause. Under these circumstances, he who is acting in
K ṛṣṇa consciousness under the direction of the Supersoul situated within the heart is
naturally not bound by any activity.
33. Why Those in complete K ṛṣṇ a consciousness are not ultimately responsible for their actions? BG 18.14
Those in complete K ṛṣṇ a consciousness are not ultimately responsible for their actions.
Everything is dependent on the supreme will, the Supersoul, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
34. Why The words “right” and “wrong” are very signiﬁcant ? BG 18.15
Right work is work done in terms of the prescribed directions in the scriptures, and
wrong work is work done against the principles of the scriptural injunctions. But
whatever is done requires these ﬁve factors for its complete performance.
35. Why A foolish person cannot understand that the Supersoul is sitting as a friend within and conducting his
actions? BG 18.16
Although the material causes are the place, the worker, the endeavor and the senses,
the ﬁnal cause is the Supreme, the Personality of Godhead.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad gita chapter-18 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/914129 5/636. Who thinks himself to be the doer? BG 18.16
one should see not only the four material causes but the supreme efﬁcient cause as
well. One who does not see the Supreme thinks himself to be the doer.
37. Why Lord informs Arjuna that the desire not to ﬁght arises from false ego? BG 18.17
Arjuna thought himself to be the doer of action, but he did not consider the supreme
sanction within and without.
38. Who is perfect in doing everything? BG 18.17
one who knows the instruments of work, himself as the worker, and the Supreme Lord
as the supreme sanctioner is perfect in doing everything.
39. Who is even though killing, does not kill? BG 18.17
Anyone who is acting in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness under the direction of the Supersoul or the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, even though killing, does not kill. Nor is he ever
affected by the reaction of such killing.
40. Who is certainly judged by a court of law? Bg 18.17
When a soldier kills under the command of a superior ofﬁcer, he is not subject to be
judged. But if a soldier kills on his own personal account, then he is certainly judged by
a court of law.
41. What are three kinds of impetus for daily work? BG 18.18
knowledge, the object of knowledge, and the knower.
42. What elements human being has ? BG 18.18
The instruments of work, the work itself and the worker are called the constituents of
work. Any work done by any human being has these elements.
43. What is called inspiration? BG 18.18
Before one acts, there is some impetus, which is called inspiration.
44. When work takes the form of action? BG 18.18
Any solution arrived at before work is actualized is a subtle form of work. Then work
takes the form of action.
45. What is called impetus? BG 18.18
First one has to undergo the psychological processes of thinking, feeling and willing,
and that is called impetus.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad gita chapter-18 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/914129 6/646. What is called the accumulation of work? BG 18.18
The inspiration to work is the same if it comes from the scripture or from the
instruction of the spiritual master. When the inspiration is there and the worker is
there, then actual activity takes place by the help of the senses, including the mind,
which is the center of all the senses. The sum total of all the constituents of an activity
is called the accumulation of work.
47. What Lord says about the different types of knowledge? BG 18.19
the Lord says that He wishes to speak about the different types of knowledge, workers
and work itself according to the three material modes.
48. Which knowledge posses in the mode of goodness? BG 18.20
A person who sees one spirit soul in every living being, whether a demigod, human
being, animal, bird, beast, aquatic or plant, possesses knowledge in the mode of
goodness.
49. How in every body is to see in the mode of goodness? BG 18.20
In all living entities, one spirit soul is there, although they have different bodies in
terms of their previous work. the manifestation of the living force in every body is due
to the superior nature of the Supreme Lord. Thus to see that one superior nature, that
living force, in every body is to see in the mode of goodness.
50. Which knowledge is an aspect of self-realization? BG 18.20
That living energy is imperishable, although the bodies are perishable. Differences are
perceived in terms of the body; because there are many forms of material existence in
conditional life, the living force appears to be divided. Such impersonal knowledge is an
aspect of self-realization.
51. What is called knowledge in the mode of passion? BG 18.21
The concept that the material body is the living entity and that with the destruction of
the body the consciousness is also destroyed is called knowledge in the mode of
passion.
52. Why there is no separate soul beyond the body? BG 18.21
According to that knowledge, bodies differ from one another because of the
development of different types of consciousness, otherwise there is no separate soul
which manifests consciousness. The body is itself the soul, and there is no separate soul
beyond the body.
