cause of his many sufferings. As long as he is in contact with matter,
he has to execute work in terms of material necessities. Krsnaconsciousness, however, brings one into spiritual life even while oneis within the jurisdiction of matter, for it is an arousing ofspiritual existence by practice in the material world. The more one isadvanced, the more he is freed from the clutches of matter. The Lord isnot partial toward anyone. Everything depends on one's practicalperformance of duties in an effort to control the senses and conquerthe influence of desire and anger. And, attaining Krsna consciousnessby controlling the above-mentioned passions, one remains factually inthe transcendental stage, or brahma-nirvana. The eightfold yogamysticism is automatically practiced in Krsna consciousness because theultimate purpose is served. There is a gradual process of elevation inthe practice of yama, niyama, asana, pratyahara, dhyana, dharana,pranayama, and samadhi. But these only preface perfection by devotionalservice, which alone can award peace to the human being. It is thehighest perfection of life.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Fifth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Karma-yoga, or Action in KrsnaConsciousness.
Chapter 6
Sankhya-yoga
TEXT 1
sri-bhagavan uvaca
anasritah karma-phalamkaryam karma karoti yahsa sannyasi ca yogi cana niragnir na cakriyah
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Lord said; anasritah--without shelter; karma-
phalam--the result of work; karyam--obligatory; karma--work; karoti--performs; yah--one who; sah--he; sannyasi--in the renounced order; ca--also; yogi--mystic; ca--also; na--not; nih--without; agnih--fire; na--nor; ca--also; akriyah--without duty.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: One who is unattached to the fruits of his work
and who works as he is obligated is in the renounced order of life, andhe is the true mystic: not he who lights no fire and performs no work.
PURPORTIn this chapter the Lord explains that the process of the eightfold
yoga system is a means to control the mind and the senses. However,this is very difficult for people in general to perform, especially inthe Age of Kali. Although the eightfold yoga system is recommended inthis chapter, the Lord emphasizes that the process of karma-yoga, oracting in Krsna consciousness, is better. Everyone acts in this worldto maintain his family and their paraphernalia, but no one is workingwithout some self-interest, some personal gratification, be itconcentrated or extended. The criterion of perfection is to act in
Krsna consciousness, and not with a view to enjoying the fruits of
work. To act in Krsna consciousness is the duty of every living entitybecause all are constitutionally parts and parcels of the Supreme. Theparts of the body work for the satisfaction of the whole body. Thelimbs of the body do not act for self-satisfaction but for thesatisfaction of the complete whole. Similarly, the living entity whoacts for satisfaction of the supreme whole and not for personalsatisfaction is the perfect sannyasi, the perfect yogi.The sannyasis sometimes artificially think that they have becomeliberated from all material duties, and therefore they cease to performagnihotra yajnas (fire sacrifices), but actually they are self-interested because their goal is becoming one with the impersonalBrahman. Such a desire is greater than any material desire, but it isnot without self-interest. Similarly, the mystic yogi who practices theyoga system with half-open eyes, ceasing all material activities,desires some satisfaction for his personal self. But a person acting inKrsna consciousness works for the satisfaction of the whole, withoutself-interest. A Krsna conscious person has no desire for self-satisfaction. His criterion of success is the satisfaction of Krsna,and thus he is the perfect sannyasi, or perfect yogi. Lord Caitanya,the highest perfectional symbol of renunciation, prays in this way:
na dhanam na janam na sundarim
kavitam va jagad-isa kamayemama janmani janmanisvarebhavatad bhaktir ahaituki tvayi
"O Almighty Lord, I have no desire to accumulate wealth, nor to enjoy
beautiful women. Nor do I want any number of followers. What I wantonly is the causeless mercy of Your devotional service in my life,birth after birth."
TEXT 2
yam sannyasam iti prahur
yogam tam viddhi pandavana hy asannyasta-sankalpoyogi bhavati kascana
SYNONYMSyam--what; sannyasam--renunciation; iti--thus; prahuh--they say; yogam-
-linking with the Supreme; tam--that; viddhi--you must know; pandava--Oson of Pandu; na--never; hi--certainly; asannyasta--without giving up;sankalpah--self-satisfaction; yogi--a mystic transcendentalist;bhavati--becomes; kascana--anyone.
TRANSLATIONWhat is called renunciation is the same as yoga, or linking oneself
with the Supreme, for no one can become a yogi unless he renounces thedesire for sense gratification.
PURPORTReal sannyasa-yoga or bhakti means that one should know his
constitutional position as the living entity, and act accordingly. Theliving entity has no separate independent identity. He is the marginal
energy of the Supreme. When he is entrapped by material energy, he is
conditioned, and when he is Krsna conscious, or aware of the spiritualenergy, then he is in his real and natural state of life. Therefore,when one is in complete knowledge, one ceases all material sensegratification, or renounces all kinds of sense gratificatoryactivities. This is practiced by the yogis who restrain the senses frommaterial attachment. But a person in Krsna consciousness has noopportunity to engage his senses in anything which is not for thepurpose of Krsna. Therefore, a Krsna conscious person is simultaneouslya sannyasi and a yogi. The purpose of knowledge and of restraining thesenses, as prescribed in the jnana and yoga processes, is automaticallyserved in Krsna consciousness. If one is unable to give up theactivities of his selfish nature, then jnana and yoga are of no avail.The real aim is for a living entity to give up all selfish satisfactionand to be prepared to satisfy the Supreme. A Krsna conscious person hasno desire for any kind of self-enjoyment. He is always engaged for theenjoyment of the Supreme. One who has no information of the Suprememust therefore be engaged in self-satisfaction, because no one canstand on the platform of inactivity. All purposes are perfectly servedby the practice of Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 3
aruruksor muner yogam
karma karanam ucyateyogarudhasya tasyaivasamah karanam ucyate
SYNONYMSaruruksoh--of one who has just begun yoga; muneh--of the sage; yogam--
the eightfold yoga system; karma--work; karanam--the cause; ucyate--issaid to be; yoga--eightfold yoga; arudhasya--of one who has attained;tasya--his; eva--certainly; samah--cessation of all materialactivities; karanam--the cause; ucyate--is said to be.
TRANSLATIONFor one who is a neophyte in the eightfold yoga system, work is said to
be the means; and for one who has already attained to yoga, cessationof all material activities is said to be the means.
PURPORTThe process of linking oneself with the Supreme is called yoga, which
may be compared to a ladder for attaining the topmost spiritualrealization. This ladder begins from the lowest material condition ofthe living entity and rises up to perfect self-realization in purespiritual life. According to various elevations, different parts of theladder are known by different names. But all in all, the completeladder is called yoga and may be divided into three parts, namelyjnana-yoga, dhyana-yoga and bhakti-yoga. The beginning of the ladder iscalled the yogaruruksu stage, and the highest rung is called yogarudha.Concerning the eightfold yoga system, attempts in the beginning toenter into meditation through regulative principles of life andpractice of different sitting postures (which are more or less bodilyexercises) are considered fruitive material activities. All suchactivities lead to achieving perfect mental equilibrium to control the
senses. When one is accomplished in the practice of meditation, he
ceases all disturbing mental activities.A Krsna conscious person is, however, situated from the beginning onthe platform of meditation because he always thinks of Krsna. And,being constantly engaged in the service of Krsna, he is considered tohave ceased all material activities.
TEXT 4
yada hi nendriyarthesu
na karmasv anusajjatesarva-sankalpa-sannyasiyogarudhas tadocyate
SYNONYMSyada--when; hi--certainly; na--not; indriya-arthesu--in sense
gratification; na--never; karmasu--in fruitive activities; anusajjate--does necessarily engage; sarva-sankalpa--all material desires;sannyasi--renouncer; yoga-arudhah--elevated in yoga; tada--at thattime; ucyate--is said to be.
TRANSLATIONA person is said to be have attained to yoga when, having renounced all
material desires, he neither acts for sense gratification nor engagesin fruitive activities.
PURPORTWhen a person is fully engaged in the transcendental loving service of
the Lord, he is pleased in himself, and thus he is no longer engaged insense gratification or in fruitive activities. Otherwise, one must beengaged in sense gratification, since one cannot live withoutengagement. Without Krsna consciousness, one must be always seekingself-centered or extended selfish activities. But a Krsna consciousperson can do everything for the satisfaction of Krsna and thereby beperfectly detached from sense gratification. One who has no suchrealization must mechanically try to escape material desires beforebeing elevated to the top rung of the yoga ladder.
TEXT 5
uddhared atmanatmanam
natmanam avasadayetatmaiva hy atmano bandhuratmaiva ripur atmanah
SYNONYMSuddharet--one must deliver; atmana--by the mind; atmanam--the
conditioned soul; na--never; atmanam--the conditioned soul; avasadayet--put into degradation; atma--mind; eva--certainly; hi--indeed; atmanah--of the conditioned soul; bandhuh--friend; atma--mind; eva--certainly;ripuh--enemy; atmanah--of the conditioned soul.
TRANSLATION
A man must elevate himself by his own mind, not degrade himself. The
mind is the friend of the conditioned soul, and his enemy as well.
PURPORTThe word atma denotes body, mind and soul--depending upon different
circumstances. In the yoga system, the mind and the conditioned soulare especially important. Since the mind is the central point of yogapractice, atma refers here to the mind. The purpose of the yoga systemis to control the mind and to draw it away from attachment to senseobjects. It is stressed herein that the mind must be so trained that itcan deliver the conditioned soul from the mire of nescience. Inmaterial existence one is subjected to the influence of the mind andthe senses. In fact, the pure soul is entangled in the material worldbecause of the mind's ego which desires to lord it over materialnature. Therefore, the mind should be trained so that it will not beattracted by the glitter of material nature, and in this way theconditioned soul may be saved. One should not degrade oneself byattraction to sense objects. The more one is attracted by senseobjects, the more one becomes entangled in material existence. The bestway to disentangle oneself is to always engage the mind in Krsnaconsciousness. The word hi is used for emphasizing this point, i.e.,that one must do this. It is also said:
mana eva manusyanam
karanam bandha-moksayohbandhaya visayasangomuktyai nirvisayam manah
"For man, mind is the cause of bondage and mind is the cause of
liberation. Mind absorbed in sense objects is the cause of bondage, andmind detached from the sense objects is the cause of liberation."(Amrta-bindu Upanisad 2) Therefore, the mind which is always engaged inKrsna consciousness is the cause of supreme liberation.
TEXT 6
bandhur atmatmanas tasya
yenatmaivatmana jitahanatmanas tu satrutvevartetatmaiva satru-vat
SYNONYMSbandhuh--friend; atma--mind; atmanah--of the living entity; tasya--of
him; yena--by whom; atma--mind; eva--certainly; atmana--by the livingentity; jitah--conquered; anatmanah--of one who has failed to controlthe mind; tu--but; satrutve--because of enmity; varteta--remains; atmaeva--the very mind; satru-vat--as an enemy.
TRANSLATIONFor him who has conquered the mind, the mind is the best of friends;
but for one who has failed to do so, his very mind will be the greatestenemy.
PURPORT
The purpose of practicing eightfold yoga is to control the mind in
order to make it a friend in discharging the human mission. Unless themind is controlled, the practice of yoga (for show) is simply a wasteof time. One who cannot control his mind lives always with the greatestenemy, and thus his life and its mission are spoiled. Theconstitutional position of the living entity is to carry out the orderof the superior. As long as one's mind remains an unconquered enemy,one has to serve the dictations of lust, anger, avarice, illusion, etc.But when the mind is conquered, one voluntarily agrees to abide by thedictation of the Personality of Godhead, who is situated within theheart of everyone as Paramatma. Real yoga practice entails meeting theParamatma within the heart and then following His dictation. For onewho takes to Krsna consciousness directly, perfect surrender to thedictation of the Lord follows automatically.
TEXT 7
jitatmanah prasantasya
paramatma samahitahsitosna-sukha-duhkhesutatha manapamanayoh
SYNONYMSjita-atmanah--of one who has conquered his mind; prasantasya--of who
has attained tranquillity by such control over the mind; parama-atma--the Supersoul; samahitah--approached completely; sita--cold; usna--heat; sukha--in happiness; duhkhesu--in distress; tatha--also; mana--honor; apamanayoh--and dishonor.
TRANSLATIONFor one who has conquered the mind, the Supersoul is already reached,
for he has attained tranquillity. To such a man happiness and distress,heat and cold, honor and dishonor are all the same.
PURPORTActually, every living entity is intended to abide by the dictation of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is seated in everyone's heartas Paramatma. When the mind is misled by the external illusory energy,one becomes entangled in material activities. Therefore, as soon asone's mind is controlled through one of the yoga systems, one is to beconsidered as having already reached the destination. One has to abideby superior dictation. When one's mind is fixed on the superior nature,he has no other alternative but to follow the dictation of the Supreme.The mind must admit some superior dictation and follow it. The effectof controlling the mind is that one automatically follows the dictationof the Paramatma or Supersoul. Because this transcendental position isat once achieved by one who is in Krsna consciousness, the devotee ofthe Lord is unaffected by the dualities of material existence, namelydistress and happiness, cold and heat, etc. This state is practicalsamadhi, or absorption in the Supreme.
TEXT 8
jnana-vijnana-trptatma
kuta-stho vijitendriyah
yukta ity ucyate yogi
sama-lostrasma-kancanah
SYNONYMSjnana--acquired knowledge; vijnana--realized knowledge; trpta--
satisfied; atma--living entity; kuta-sthah--spiritually situated;vijita-indriyah--sensually controlled; yuktah--competent for self-realization; iti--thus; ucyate--is said; yogi--the mystic; sama--equipoised; lostra--pebbles; asma--stone; kancanah--gold.
TRANSLATIONA person is said to be established in self-realization and is called a
yogi [or mystic] when he is fully satisfied by virtue of acquiredknowledge and realization. Such a person is situated in transcendenceand is self-controlled. He sees everything--whether it be pebbles,stones or gold--as the same.
PURPORTBook knowledge without realization of the Supreme Truth is useless.
This is stated as follows:
atah sri-krsna-namadi
na bhaved grahyam indriyaihsevonmukhe hi jihvadausvayam eva sphuraty adah
"No one can understand the transcendental nature of the name, form,
quality and pastimes of Sri Krsna through his materially contaminatedsenses. Only when one becomes spiritually saturated by transcendentalservice to the Lord are the transcendental name, form, quality andpastimes of the Lord revealed to him." (Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 1.2.234)This Bhagavad-gita is the science of Krsna consciousness. No one canbecome Krsna conscious simply by mundane scholarship. One must befortunate enough to associate with a person who is in pureconsciousness. A Krsna conscious person has realized knowledge, by thegrace of Krsna, because he is satisfied with pure devotional service.By realized knowledge, one becomes perfect. By transcendental knowledgeone can remain steady in his convictions, but by mere academicknowledge one can be easily deluded and confused by apparentcontradictions. It is the realized soul who is actually self-controlledbecause he is surrendered to Krsna. He is transcendental because he hasnothing to do with mundane scholarship. For him mundane scholarship andmental speculation, which may be as good as gold to others, are of nogreater value than pebbles or stones.
TEXT 9
suhrn-mitrary-udasina-
madhyastha-dvesya-bandhususadhusv api ca papesusama-buddhir visisyate
SYNONYMS
su-hrt--by nature a well-wisher; mitra--benefactor with affection; ari-
-enemy; udasina--neutral between belligerents; madhya-stha--mediatorbetween the belligerents; dvesya--envious; bandhusu--among relatives orwell-wishers; sadhusu--unto the pious; api--as well as; ca--and;papesu--unto the sinners; sama-buddhih--having equal intelligence;visisyate--is far advanced.
TRANSLATIONA person is said to be still further advanced when he regards all--the
honest well-wisher, friends and enemies, the envious, the pious, thesinner and those who are indifferent and impartial--with an equal mind.
TEXT 10
yogi yunjita satatam
atmanam rahasi sthitahekaki yata-cittatmanirasir aparigrahah
SYNONYMSyogi--a transcendentalist; yunjita--must concentrate in Krsna
consciousness; satatam--constantly; atmanam--himself (by the body, mindand self); rahasi--in a secluded place; sthitah--being so situated;ekaki--alone; yata-citta-atma--always careful in mind; nirasih--withoutbeing attracted by anything else; aparigrahah--free from the feeling ofpossessiveness.
TRANSLATIONA transcendentalist should always try to concentrate his mind on the
Supreme Self; he should live alone in a secluded place and shouldalways carefully control his mind. He should be free from desires andfeelings of possessiveness.
PURPORTKrsna is realized in different degrees as Brahman, Paramatma and the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Krsna consciousness means, concisely,to be always engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord.But those who are attached to the impersonal Brahman or the localizedSupersoul are also partially Krsna conscious, because impersonalBrahman is the spiritual ray of Krsna and Supersoul is the all-pervading partial expansion of Krsna. Thus the impersonalist and themeditator are also indirectly Krsna conscious. A directly Krsnaconscious person is the topmost transcendentalist because such adevotee knows what is meant by Brahman or Paramatma. His knowledge ofthe Absolute Truth is perfect, whereas the impersonalist and themeditative yogi are imperfectly Krsna conscious.Nevertheless, all of these are instructed herewith to be constantlyengaged in their particular pursuits so that they may come to thehighest perfection sooner or later. The first business of atranscendentalist is to keep the mind always on Krsna. One shouldalways think of Krsna and not forget Him even for a moment.Concentration of the mind on the Supreme is called samadhi, or trance.In order to concentrate the mind, one should always remain in seclusionand avoid disturbance by external objects. He should be very careful to
accept favorable and reject unfavorable conditions that affect his
realization. And, in perfect determination, he should not hanker afterunnecessary material things that entangle him by feelings ofpossessiveness.All these perfections and precautions are perfectly executed when oneis directly in Krsna consciousness, because direct Krsna consciousnessmeans self-abnegation, wherein there is very little chance for materialpossessiveness. Srila Rupa Gosvami characterizes Krsna consciousness inthis way:
anasaktasya visayan
yatharham upayunjatahnirbandhah krsna-sambandheyuktam vairagyam ucyate
prapancikataya buddhya
hari-sambandhi-vastunahmumuksubhih parityagovairagyam phalgu kathyate
"When one is not attached to anything, but at the same time accepts
everything in relation to Krsna, one is rightly situated abovepossessiveness. On the other hand, one who rejects everything withoutknowledge of its relationship to Krsna is not as complete in hisrenunciation." (Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 2.255-256)A Krsna conscious person well knows that everything belongs to Krsna,and thus he is always free from feelings of personal possession. Assuch, he has no hankering for anything on his own personal account. Heknows how to accept things in favor of Krsna consciousness and how toreject things unfavorable to Krsna consciousness. He is always alooffrom material things because he is always transcendental, and he isalways alone, having nothing to do with persons not in Krsnaconsciousness. Therefore a person in Krsna consciousness is the perfectyogi.
TEXTS 11-12
sucau dese pratisthapya
sthiram asanam atmanahnaty-ucchritam nati-nicamcailajina-kusottaram
tatraikagram manah krtva
yata-cittendriya-kriyahupavisyasane yunjyadyogam atma-visuddhaye
SYNONYMSsucau--in a sanctified; dese--in the land; pratisthapya--placing;
sthiram--firm; asanam--seat; atmanah--self-dependent; na--not; ati--too; ucchritam--high; na--nor; ati--too; nicam--low; caila-ajina--softcloth and deerskin; kusottaram--kusa grass; tatra--thereupon; eka-agram--one attention; manah--mind; krtva--doing so; yata-citta--controlling the mind; indriya--senses; kriyah--activities; upavisya--sitting on; asane--on the seat; yunjyat--execute; yogam--yoga practice;atma--heart; visuddhaye--for clarifying.
TRANSLATION
To practice yoga, one should go to a secluded place and should lay kusa
grass on the ground and then cover it with a deerskin and a soft cloth.The seat should neither be too high nor too low and should be situatedin a sacred place. The yogi should then sit on it very firmly andshould practice yoga by controlling the mind and the senses, purifyingthe heart and fixing the mind on one point.
PURPORT"Sacred place" refers to places of pilgrimage. In India the yogis, the
transcendentalists or the devotees all leave home and reside in sacredplaces such as Prayaga, Mathura, Vrndavana, Hrsikesa and Hardwar and insolitude practice yoga where the sacred rivers like the Yamuna and theGanges flow. But often this is not possible, especially for Westerners.The so-called yoga societies in big cities may be successful in earningmaterial benefit, but they are not at all suitable for the actualpractice of yoga. One who is not self-controlled and whose mind is notundisturbed cannot practice meditation. Therefore, in the Brhan-naradiya Purana it is said that in the Kali-yuga (the present yuga, orage) when people in general are short-lived, slow in spiritualrealization and always disturbed by various anxieties, the best meansof spiritual realization is chanting the holy name of the Lord.
harer nama harer nama
harer namaiva kevalamkalau nasty eva nasty evanasty eva gatir anyatha
"In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance is
chanting the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is noother way. There is no other way."
TEXTS 13-14
samam kaya-siro-grivam
dharayann acalam sthirahsampreksya nasikagram svamdisas canavalokayan
prasantatma vigata-bhir
brahmacari-vrate sthitahmanah samyamya mac-cittoyukta asita mat-parah
SYNONYMSsamam--straight; kaya-sirah--body and head; grivam--neck; dharayan--
holding; acalam--unmoved; sthirah--still; sampreksya--looking; nasika--nose; agram--tip; svam--own; disah--all sides; ca--also; anavalokayan--not seeing; prasanta--unagitated; atma--mind; vigata-bhih--devoid offear; brahmacari-vrate--in the vow of celibacy; sthitah--situated;manah--mind; samyamya--completely subduing; mat--upon Me (Krsna);cittah--concentrated; yuktah--the actual yogi; asita--being so; mat--unto Me; parah--the ultimate goal.
TRANSLATION
One should hold one's body, neck and head erect in a straight line and
stare steadily at the tip of the nose. Thus, with an unagitated,subdued mind, devoid of fear, completely free from sex life, one shouldmeditate upon Me within the heart and make Me the ultimate goal oflife.
PURPORTThe goal of life is to know Krsna, who is situated within the heart of
every living being as Paramatma, the four-handed Visnu form. The yogaprocess is practiced in order to discover and see this localized formof Visnu, and not for any other purpose. The localized visnu-murti isthe plenary representation of Krsna dwelling within one's heart. Onewho has no program to realize this visnu-murti is uselessly engaged inmock-yoga practice and is certainly wasting his time. Krsna is theultimate goal of life, and the visnu-murti situated in one's heart isthe object of yoga practice. To realize this visnu-murti within theheart, one has to observe complete abstinence from sex life; thereforeone has to leave home and live alone in a secluded place, remainingseated as mentioned above. One cannot enjoy sex life daily at home orelsewhere and attend a so-called yoga class and thus become a yogi. Onehas to practice controlling the mind and avoiding all kinds of sensegratification, of which sex life is the chief. In the rules of celibacywritten by the great sage Yajnavalkya it is said:
karmana manasa vaca
sarvavasthasu sarvadasarvatra maithuna-tyagobrahmacaryam pracaksate
"The vow of brahmacarya is meant to help one completely abstain from
sex indulgence in work, words and mind--at all times, under allcircumstances, and in all places." No one can perform correct yogapractice through sex indulgence. Brahmacarya is taught, therefore, fromchildhood when one has no knowledge of sex life. Children at the age offive are sent to the guru-kula, or the place of the spiritual master,and the master trains the young boys in the strict discipline ofbecoming brahmacaris. Without such practice, no one can makeadvancement in any yoga, whether it be dhyana, jnana or bhakti. Onewho, however, follows the rules and regulations of married life, havinga sexual relationship only with his wife (and that also underregulation), is also called brahmacari. Such a restrained householderbrahmacari may be accepted in the bhakti school, but the jnana anddhyana schools do not even admit householder brahmacaris. They requirecomplete abstinence without compromise. In the bhakti school, ahouseholder brahmacari is allowed controlled sex life because the cultof bhakti-yoga is so powerful that one automatically loses sexualattraction, being engaged in the superior service of the Lord. In theBhagavad-gita (2.59) it is said:
visaya vinivartante
niraharasya dehinahrasa-varjam raso 'py asyaparam drstva nivartate
Whereas others are forced to restrain themselves from sense
gratification, a devotee of the Lord automatically refrains because of
superior taste. Other than the devotee, no one has any information of
that superior taste.Vigata-bhih. One cannot be fearless unless one is fully in Krsnaconsciousness. A conditioned soul is fearful due to his pervertedmemory, his forgetfulness of his eternal relationship with Krsna. TheBhagavatam (11.2.37) says, bhayam dvitiyabhinivesatah syad isadapetasya viparyayo 'smrtih. Krsna consciousness is the only basis forfearlessness. Therefore, perfect practice is possible for a person whois Krsna conscious. And since the ultimate goal of yoga practice is tosee the Lord within, a Krsna conscious person is already the best ofall yogis. The principles of the yoga system mentioned herein aredifferent from those of the popular so-called yoga societies.
TEXT 15
yunjann evam sadatmanam
yogi niyata-manasahsantim nirvana-paramammat-samstham adhigacchati
SYNONYMSyunjan--practicing like this; evam--as mentioned above; sada--
constantly; atmanam--body, mind and soul; yogi--the mystictranscendentalist; niyata-manasah--regulated mind; santim--peace;nirvana-paramam--cessation of material existence; mat-samstham--in thespiritual sky (the kingdom of God); adhigacchati--does attain.
TRANSLATIONThus practicing control of the body, mind and activities, the mystic
transcendentalist attains to the kingdom of God [or the abode of Krsna]by cessation of material existence.
PURPORTThe ultimate goal in practicing yoga is now clearly explained. Yoga
practice is not meant for attaining any kind of material facility; itis to enable the cessation of all material existence. One who seeks animprovement in health or aspires after material perfection is no yogiaccording to Bhagavad-gita. Nor does cessation of material existenceentail one's entering into "the void," which is only a myth. There isno void anywhere within the creation of the Lord. Rather, the cessationof material existence enables one to enter into the spiritual sky, theabode of the Lord. The abode of the Lord is also clearly described inthe Bhagavad-gita as that place where there is no need of sun, moon orelectricity. All the planets in the spiritual kingdom are self-illuminated like the sun in the material sky. The kingdom of God iseverywhere, but the spiritual sky and the planets thereof are calledparam dhama, or superior abodes.A consummate yogi, who is perfect in understanding Lord Krsna, as isclearly stated herein (mat-cittah, mat-parah, mat-sthanam) by the LordHimself, can attain real peace and can ultimately reach His supremeabode, the Krsnaloka, known as Goloka Vrndavana. In the Brahma-samhita(5.37) it is clearly stated, (goloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhutah)that the Lord, although residing always in His abode called Goloka, isthe all-pervading Brahman and the localized Paramatma as well by dintof His superior spiritual energies. No one can reach the spiritual sky
(Vaikuntha) or enter into the Lord's eternal abode (Goloka Vrndavana)
without the proper understanding of Krsna and His plenary expansionVisnu. Therefore a person working in Krsna consciousness is the perfectyogi, because his mind is always absorbed in Krsna's activities (sa vaimanah krsna-padaravindayoh). In the Vedas also (Svetasvatara Upanisad3.8) we learn, tam eva viditvati mrtyum eti: "One can overcome the pathof birth and death only by understanding the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, Krsna." In other words, perfection of the yoga system is theattainment of freedom from material existence and not some magicaljugglery or gymnastic feats to befool innocent people.
TEXT 16
naty-asnatas 'tu yogo 'sti
na caikantam anasnatahna cati-svapna-silasyajagrato naiva carjuna
SYNONYMSna--never; ati--too much; asnatah--of one who eats so; tu--but; yogah--
linking with the Supreme; asti--there is; na--nor; ca--also; ekantam--very low; anasnatah--abstaining from eating; na--nor; ca--also; ati--too much; svapna-silasya--of one who sleeps too much; jagratah--or onewho keeps night watch too much; na--not; eva--ever; ca--and; arjuna--OArjuna.
TRANSLATIONThere is no possibility of one's becoming a yogi, O Arjuna, if one eats
too much, or eats too little, sleeps too much or does not sleep enough.
PURPORTRegulation of diet and sleep is recommended herein for the yogis. Too
much eating means eating more than is required to keep the body andsoul together. There is no need for men to eat animals, because thereis an ample supply of grains, vegetables, fruits and milk. Such simplefoodstuff is considered to be in the mode of goodness according to theBhagavad-gita. Animal food is for those in the mode of ignorance.Therefore, those who indulge in animal food, drinking, smoking andeating food which is not first offered to Krsna will suffer sinfulreactions because of eating only polluted things. Bhunjate te tv aghampapa ye pacanty atma-karanat. Anyone who eats for sense pleasure, orcooks for himself, not offering his food to Krsna, eats only sin. Onewho eats sin and eats more than is allotted to him cannot executeperfect yoga. It is best that one eat only the remnants of foodstuffoffered to Krsna. A person in Krsna consciousness does not eat anythingwhich is not first offered to Krsna. Therefore, only the Krsnaconscious person can attain perfection in yoga practice. Nor can onewho artificially abstains from eating, manufacturing his own personalprocess of fasting, practice yoga. The Krsna conscious person observesfasting as it is recommended in the scriptures. He does not fast or eatmore than is required, and he is thus competent to perform yogapractice. One who eats more than required will dream very much whilesleeping, and he must consequently sleep more than is required. Oneshould not sleep more than six hours daily. One who sleeps more thansix hours out of twenty-four is certainly influenced by the mode of
ignorance. A person in the mode of ignorance is lazy and prone to sleep
a great deal. Such a person cannot perform yoga.
TEXT 17
yuktahara-viharasya
yukta-cestasya karmasuyukta-svapnavabodhasyayogo bhavati duhkha-ha
SYNONYMSyukta--regulated; ahara--eating; viharasya--recreation; yukta--
regulated; cestasya--of one who works for maintenance; karmasu--indischarging duties; yukta--regulated; svapna-avabodhasya--regulatedsleep and wakefulness; yogah--practice of yoga; bhavati--becomes;duhkha-ha--diminishing pains.
TRANSLATIONHe who is temperate in his habits of eating, sleeping, working and
recreation can mitigate all material pains by practicing the yogasystem.
PURPORTExtravagance in the matter of eating, sleeping, defending and mating--
which are demands of the body--can block advancement in the practice ofyoga. As far as eating is concerned, it can be regulated only when oneis practiced to take and accept prasadam, sanctified food. Lord Krsnais offered, according to the Bhagavad-gita (9.26), vegetables, flowers,fruits, grains, milk, etc. In this way, a person in Krsna consciousnessbecomes automatically trained not to accept food not meant for humanconsumption, or which not in the category of goodness. As far assleeping is concerned, a Krsna conscious person is always alert in thedischarge of his duties in Krsna consciousness, and therefore anyunnecessary time spent sleeping is considered a great loss. Avyartha-kalatvam: a Krsna conscious person cannot bear to pass a minute of hislife without being engaged in the service of the Lord. Therefore, hissleeping is kept to a minimum. His ideal in this respect is Srila RupaGosvami, who was always engaged in the service of Krsna and who couldnot sleep more than two hours a day, and sometimes not even that.Thakura Haridasa would not even accept prasadam nor even sleep for amoment without finishing his daily routine of chanting with his beadsthree hundred thousand names. As far as work is concerned, a Krsnaconscious person does not do anything which is not connected withKrsna's interest, and thus his work is always regulated and isuntainted by sense gratification. Since there is no question of sensegratification, there is no material leisure for a person in Krsnaconsciousness. And because he is regulated in all his work, speech,sleep, wakefulness and all other bodily activities, there is nomaterial misery for him.
TEXT 18
yada viniyatam cittam
atmany evavatisthatenisprhah sarva-kamebhyo
yukta ity ucyate tada
SYNONYMSyada--when; viniyatam--particularly disciplined; cittam--the mind and
its activities; atmani--in the transcendence; eva--certainly;avatisthate--becomes situated; nisprhah--devoid of desire; sarva--allkinds of; kamebhyah--material desires; yuktah--well situated in yoga;iti--thus; ucyate--is said to be; tada--at that time.
TRANSLATIONWhen the yogi, by practice of yoga, disciplines his mental activities
and becomes situated in transcendence--devoid of all material desires--he is said to have attained yoga.
PURPORTThe activities of the yogi are distinguished from those of an ordinary
person by his characteristic cessation from all kinds of materialdesires--of which sex is the chief. A perfect yogi is so welldisciplined in the activities of the mind that he can no longer bedisturbed by any kind of material desire. This perfectional stage canautomatically be attained by persons in Krsna consciousness, as statedin the Srimad-Bhagavatam (9.4.18-20):
sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayor
vacamsi vaikuntha-gunanuvarnanekarau harer mandira-marjanadisusrutim cakaracyuta-sat-kathodaye
mukunda-lingalaya-darsane drsau
tad-bhrtya-gatra-sparse 'nga-sangamamghranam ca tat-pada-saroja-saurabhesrimat-tulasya rasanam tad-arpite
padau hareh ksetra-padanusarpane
siro hrsikesa-padabhivandanekamam ca dasye na tu kama-kamyayayathottama-sloka-janasraya ratih
"King Ambarisa first of all engaged his mind on the lotus feet of Lord
Krsna; then, one after another, he engaged his words in describing thetranscendental qualities of the Lord, his hands in mopping the templeof the Lord, his ears in hearing of the activities of the Lord, hiseyes in seeing the transcendental forms of the Lord, his body intouching the bodies of the devotees, his sense of smell in smelling thescents of the lotus flower offered to the Lord, his tongue in tastingthe tulasi leaf offered at the lotus feet of the Lord, his legs ingoing to places of pilgrimage and the temple of the Lord, his head inoffering obeisances unto the Lord and his desires in executing themission of the Lord. All these transcendental activities are quitebefitting a pure devotee."This transcendental stage may be inexpressible subjectively by thefollowers of the impersonalist path, but it becomes very easy andpractical for a person in Krsna consciousness, as is apparent in theabove description of the engagements of Maharaja Ambarisa. Unless themind is fixed on the lotus feet of the Lord by constant remembrance,
such transcendental engagements are not practical. In the devotional
service of the Lord, therefore, these prescribed activities are calledarcana, or engaging all the senses in the service of the Lord. Thesenses and the mind require engagements. Simple abnegation is notpractical. Therefore, for people in general--especially those who arenot in the renounced order of life--transcendental engagement of thesenses and the mind as described above is the perfect process fortranscendental achievement, which is called yukta in the Bhagavad-gita.
TEXT 19
yatha dipo nivata-stho
nengate sopama smrtayogino yata-cittasyayunjato yogam atmanah
SYNONYMSyatha--as; dipah--a lamp; nivata-sthah--in a place without wind; na--
does not; ingate--waver; sa upama--compared to that; smrta--likened;yoginah--of the yogi; yata-cittasya--whose mind is controlled;yunjatah--constantly engaged in; yogam--meditation; atmanah--ontranscendence.
TRANSLATIONAs a lamp in a windless place does not waver, so the transcendentalist,
whose mind is controlled, remains always steady in his meditation onthe transcendent self.
PURPORTA truly Krsna conscious person, always absorbed in transcendence, in
constant undisturbed meditation on his worshipable Lord, is as steadyas a lamp in a windless place.
TEXTS 20-23
yatroparamate cittam
niruddham yoga-sevayayatra caivatmanatmanampasyann atmani tusyati
sukham atyantikam yat tad
buddhi-grahyam atindriyamvetti yatra na caivayamsthitas calati tattvatah
yam labdhva caparam labham
manyate nadhikam tatahyasmin sthito na duhkhenagurunapi vicalyate
tam vidyad duhkha-samyoga-
viyogam yoga-samjnitam
SYNONYMS
yatra--in that state of affairs; uparamate--when one feels
transcendental happiness; cittam--mental activities; niruddham--restrained from matter; yoga-sevaya--by performance of yoga; yatra--inthat; ca--also; eva--certainly; atmana--by the pure mind; atmanam--theself; pasyan--realizing the position; atmani--in the self; tusyati--becomes satisfied; sukham--happiness; atyantikam--supreme; yat--inwhich; tat--that; buddhi--intelligence; grahyam--accessible;atindriyam--transcendental; vetti--knows; yatra--wherein; na--never;ca--also; eva--certainly; ayam--in this; sthitah--situated; calati--moves; tattvatah--from the truth; yam--that which; labdhva--byattainment; ca--also; aparam--any other; labham--gain; manyate--doesnot mind; na--never; adhikam--more than that; tatah--from that; yasmin--in which; sthitah--being situated; na--never; duhkhena--by miseries;guruna api--even though very difficult; vicalyate--becomes shaken; tam--that; vidyat--you must know; duhkha-samyoga--miseries of materialcontact; viyogam--extermination; yoga-samjnitam--trance in yoga.
TRANSLATIONThe stage of perfection is called trance, or samadhi, when one's mind
is completely restrained from material mental activities by practice ofyoga. This is characterized by one's ability to see the self by thepure mind and to relish and rejoice in the self. In that joyous state,one is situated in boundless transcendental happiness and enjoyshimself through transcendental senses. Established thus, one neverdeparts from the truth and upon gaining this he thinks there is nogreater gain. Being situated in such a position, one is never shaken,even in the midst of greatest difficulty. This indeed is actual freedomfrom all miseries arising from material contact.
PURPORTBy practice of yoga one becomes gradually detached from material
concepts. This is the primary characteristic of the yoga principle. Andafter this, one becomes situated in trance, or samadhi, which meansthat the yogi realizes the Supersoul through transcendental mind andintelligence, without any of the misgivings of identifying the selfwith the Superself. Yoga practice is more or less based on theprinciples of the Patanjali system. Some unauthorized commentators tryto identify the individual soul with the Supersoul, and the moniststhink this to be liberation, but they do not understand the realpurpose of the Patanjali system of yoga. There is an acceptance oftranscendental pleasure in the Patanjali system, but the monists do notaccept this transcendental pleasure, out of fear of jeopardizing thetheory of oneness. The duality of knowledge and knower is not acceptedby the nondualist, but in this verse transcendental pleasure--realizedthrough transcendental senses--is accepted. And this is corroborated byPatanjali Muni, the famous exponent of the yoga system. The great sagedeclares in his Yoga-sutras (3.34): purusartha-sunyanam gunanampratiprasavah kaivalyam svarupa-pratistha va citi-saktir iti.This citi-sakti, or internal potency, is transcendental. Purusarthameans material religiosity, economic development, sense gratificationand, at the end, the attempt to become one with the Supreme. This"oneness with the Supreme" is called kaivalyam by the monist. Butaccording to Patanjali, this kaivalyam is an internal, ortranscendental, potency by which the living entity becomes aware of hisconstitutional position. In the words of Lord Caitanya, this state ofaffairs is called ceto-darpana-marjanam, or clearance of the impure
mirror of the mind. This "clearance" is actually liberation, or bhava-
maha-davagni-nirvapanam. The theory of nirvana--also preliminary--corresponds with this principle. In the Bhagavatam (2.10.6) this iscalled svarupena vyavasthitih. The Bhagavad-gita also confirms thissituation in this verse.After nirvana, or material cessation, there is the manifestation ofspiritual activities, or devotional service to the Lord, known as Krsnaconsciousness. In the words of the Bhagavatam, svarupena vyavasthitih:this is the "real life of the living entity." Maya, or illusion, is thecondition of spiritual life contaminated by material infection.Liberation from this material infection does not mean destruction ofthe original eternal position of the living entity. Patanjali alsoaccepts this by his words kaivalyam svarupa-pratistha va citi-saktiriti. This citi-sakti, or transcendental pleasure, is real life. This isconfirmed in the Vedanta-sutra (1.1.12) as ananda-mayo 'bhyasat. Thisnatural transcendental pleasure is the ultimate goal of yoga and iseasily achieved by execution of devotional service, or bhakti-yoga.Bhakti-yoga will be vividly described in the Seventh Chapter ofBhagavad-gita.In the yoga system, as described in this chapter, there are two kindsof samadhi, called samprajnata-samadhi and asamprajnata-samadhi. Whenone becomes situated in the transcendental position by variousphilosophical researches, it is called samprajnata-samadhi. In theasamprajnata-samadhi there is no longer any connection with mundanepleasure, for one is then transcendental to all sorts of happinessderived from the senses. When the yogi is once situated in thattranscendental position, he is never shaken from it. Unless the yogi isable to reach this position, he is unsuccessful. Today's so-called yogapractice, which involves various sense pleasures, is contradictory. Ayogi indulging in sex and intoxication is a mockery. Even those yogiswho are attracted by the siddhis (perfections) in the process of yogaare not perfectly situated. If the yogis are attracted by the by-products of yoga, then they cannot attain the stage of perfection, asis stated in this verse. Persons, therefore, indulging in the make-showpractice of gymnastic feats or siddhis should know that the aim of yogais lost in that way.The best practice of yoga in this age is Krsna consciousness, which isnot baffling. A Krsna conscious person is so happy in his occupationthat he does not aspire after any other happiness. There are manyimpediments especially in this age of hypocrisy, to practicing hatha-yoga, dhyana-yoga and jnana-yoga, but there is no such problem inexecuting karma-yoga or bhakti-yoga.As long as the material body exists, one has to meet the demands of thebody, namely eating, sleeping, defending and mating. But a person whois in pure bhakti-yoga or in Krsna consciousness does not arouse thesenses while meeting the demands of the body. Rather, he accepts thebare necessities of life, making the best use of a bad bargain, andenjoys transcendental happiness in Krsna consciousness. He is calloustoward incidental occurrences--such as accidents, disease, scarcity andeven the death of a most dear relative--but he is always alert toexecute his duties in Krsna consciousness or bhakti-yoga. Accidentsnever deviate him from his duty. As stated in the Bhagavad-gita (2.14),agamapayino 'nityas tams titiksasva bharata. He endures all suchincidental occurrences because he knows that they come and go and donot affect his duties. In this way he achieves the highest perfectionin yoga practice.
TEXT 24
sa niscayena yoktavyo
yogo 'nirvinna-cetasasankalpa-prabhavan kamamstyaktva sarvan asesatahmanasaivendriya-gramamviniyamya samantatah
SYNONYMSsah--that yoga system; niscayena--with firm determination; yoktavyah--
must be practiced; yogah--in such practice; anirvinna-cetasa--withoutdeviation; sankalpa--material desires; prabhavan--born of; kaman--sensegratification; tyaktva--giving up; sarvan--all; asesatah--completely;manasa--by the mind; eva--certainly; indriya-gramam--the full set ofsenses; viniyamya--regulating; samantatah--from all sides.
TRANSLATIONOne should engage oneself in the practice of yoga with undeviating
determination and faith. One should abandon, without exception, allmaterial desires born of false ego and thus control all the senses onall sides by the mind.
PURPORTThe yoga practitioner should be determined and should patiently
prosecute the practice without deviation. One should be sure of successat the end and pursue this course with great perseverance, not becomingdiscouraged if there is any delay in the attainment of success. Successis sure for the rigid practitioner. Regarding bhakti-yoga, Rupa Gosvamisays:
utsahan niscayad dhairyat
tat-tat-karma-pravartanatsanga-tyagat sato vrttehsadbhir bhaktih prasidhyati
"The process of bhakti-yoga can be executed successfully with full-
hearted enthusiasm, perseverance, and determination by following theprescribed duties in the association of devotees and by engagingcompletely in activities of goodness." (Upadesamrta 3)As for determination, one should follow the example of the sparrow wholost her eggs in the waves of the ocean. A sparrow laid her eggs on theshore of the ocean, but the big ocean carried away the eggs on itswaves. The sparrow became very upset and asked the ocean to return hereggs. The ocean did not even consider her appeal. So the sparrowdecided to dry up the ocean. She began to pick out the water in hersmall beak, and everyone laughed at her for her impossibledetermination. The news of her activity spread, and at last Garuda, thegigantic bird carrier of Lord Visnu, heard it. He became compassionatetoward his small sister bird, and so he came to see the sparrow. Garudawas very pleased by the determination of the small sparrow, and hepromised to help. Thus Garuda at once asked the ocean to return hereggs lest he himself take up the work of the sparrow. The ocean wasfrightened at this, and returned the eggs. Thus the sparrow becamehappy by the grace of Garuda.
Similarly, the practice of yoga, especially bhakti-yoga in Krsna
consciousness, may appear to be a very difficult job. But if anyonefollows the principles with great determination, the Lord will surelyhelp, for God helps those who help themselves.
TEXT 25
sanaih sanair uparamed
buddhya dhrti-grhitayaatma-samstham manah krtvana kincid api cintayet
SYNONYMSsanaih--gradually; sanaih--step by step; uparamet--hesitated; buddhya--
by intelligence; dhrti-grhitaya--carrying the conviction; atma-samstham--placed in transcendence; manah--mind; krtva--doing so; na--not; kincit--anything else; api--even; cintayet--be thinking of.
TRANSLATIONGradually, step by step, with full conviction, one should become
situated in trance by means of intelligence, and thus the mind shouldbe fixed on the self alone and should think of nothing else.
PURPORTBy proper conviction and intelligence one should gradually cease sense
activities. This is called pratyahara. The mind, being controlled byconviction, meditation, and cessation of the senses, should be situatedin trance, or samadhi. At that time there is no longer any danger ofbecoming engaged in the material conception of life. In other words,although one is involved with matter as long as the material bodyexists, one should not think about sense gratification. One shouldthink of no pleasure aside from the pleasure of the Supreme Self. Thisstate is easily attained by directly practicing Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 26
yato yato niscalati
manas cancalam asthiramtatas tato niyamyaitadatmany eva vasam nayet
SYNONYMSyatah--whatever; yatah--wherever; niscalati--verily agitated; manah--
the mind; cancalam--flickering; asthiram--unsteady; tatah--from there;tatah--and thereafter; niyamya--regulating; etat--this; atmani--in theself; eva--certainly; vasam--control; nayet--must bring in.
TRANSLATIONFrom whatever and wherever the mind wanders due to its flickering and
unsteady nature, one must certainly withdraw it and bring it back underthe control of the self.
PURPORT
The nature of the mind is flickering and unsteady. But a self-realized
yogi has to control the mind; the mind should not control him. One whocontrols the mind (and therefore the senses as well) is called gosvami,or svami, and one who is controlled by the mind is called go-dasa, orthe servant of the senses. A gosvami knows the standard of sensehappiness. In transcendental sense happiness, the senses are engaged inthe service of Hrsikesa, or the supreme owner of the senses--Krsna.Serving Krsna with purified senses is called Krsna consciousness. Thatis the way of bringing the senses under full control. What is more,that is the highest perfection of yoga practice.
TEXT 27
prasanta-manasam hy enam
yoginam sukham uttamamupaiti santa-rajasambrahma-bhutam akalmasam
SYNONYMSprasanta--mind fixed on the lotus feet of Krsna; manasam--of one whose
mind is so fixed; hi--certainly; enam--this; yoginam--the yogi; sukham--happiness; uttamam--the highest; upaiti--attains; santa-rajasam--pacified passion; brahma-bhutam--liberation by identification with theAbsolute; akalmasam--freed from all past sinful reaction.
TRANSLATIONThe yogi whose mind is fixed on Me verily attains the highest
happiness. By virtue of his identity with Brahman, he is liberated; hismind is peaceful, his passions are quieted, and he is freed from sin.
PURPORTBrahma-bhuta is the state of being free from material contamination and
situated in the transcendental service of the Lord. Mad-bhaktim labhateparam (Bg. 18.54). One cannot remain in the quality of Brahman, theAbsolute, until one's mind is fixed on the lotus feet of the Lord. Savai manah krsna-padaravindayoh. To be always engaged in thetranscendental loving service of the Lord, or to remain in Krsnaconsciousness, is to be factually liberated from the mode of passionand all material contamination.
TEXT 28
yunjann evam sadatmanam
yogi vigata-kalmasahsukhena brahma-samsparsamatyantam sukham asnute
SYNONYMSyunjan--thus being engaged in yoga practice; evam--thus; sada--always;
atmanam--self; yogi--one who is in touch with the Supreme Self; vigata--is freed from; kalmasah--all material contamination; sukhena--intranscendental happiness; brahma-samsparsam--being in constant touch
with the Supreme; atyantam--highest; sukham--happiness; asnute--
attains.
TRANSLATIONSteady in the self, being freed from all material contamination, the
yogi achieves the highest perfetional stage of happiness in touch withthe supreme consciousness.
PURPORTSelf-realization means knowing one's constitutional position in
relationship to the Supreme. The individual soul is part and parcel ofthe Supreme, and his position is to render transcendental service tothe Lord. This transcendental contact with the Supreme is calledbrahma-samsparsa.
TEXT 29
sarva-bhuta-stham atmanam
sarva-bhutani catmaniiksate yoga-yuktatmasarvatra sama-darsanah
SYNONYMSsarva-bhuta-stham--situated in all beings; atmanam--the Supersoul;
sarva--all; bhutani--entities; ca--also; atmani--in the self; iksate--does see; yoga-yukta-atma--one who is dovetailed in Krsnaconsciousness; sarvatra--everywhere; sama-darsanah--seeing equally.
TRANSLATIONA true yogi observes Me in all beings, and also sees every being in Me.
Indeed, the self-realized man sees Me everywhere.
PURPORTA Krsna conscious yogi is the perfect seer because he sees Krsna, the
Supreme, situated in everyone's heart as Supersoul (Paramatma). Isvarahsarva-bhutanam hrd-dese 'rjuna tisthati. The Lord in His Paramatmafeature is situated within both the heart of the dog and that of abrahmana. The perfect yogi knows that the Lord is eternallytranscendental and is not materially affected by His presence in eithera dog or a brahmana. That is the supreme neutrality of the Lord. Theindividual soul is also situated in the individual heart, but he is notpresent in all hearts. That is the distinction between the individualsoul and the Supersoul. One who is not factually in the practice ofyoga cannot see so clearly. A Krsna conscious person can see Krsna inthe heart of both the believer and the nonbeliever. In the smrti thisis confirmed as follows: atatatvac ca matrtvac ca atma hi paramo harih.The Lord, being the source of all beings, is like the mother and themaintainer. As the mother is neutral to all different kinds ofchildren, the supreme father (or mother) is also. Consequently theSupersoul is always in every living being.Outwardly, also, every living being is situated in the energy of theLord. As will be explained in the Seventh Chapter, the Lord has,primarily, two energies--the spiritual (or superior) and the material
(or inferior). The living entity, although part of the superior energy,
is conditioned by the inferior energy; the living entity is always inthe Lord's energy. Every living entity is situated in Him in one way oranother.The yogi sees equally because he sees that all living entities,although in different situations according to the results of fruitivework, in all circumstances remain the servants of God. While in thematerial energy, the living entity serves the material senses; andwhile in spiritual energy, he serves the Supreme Lord directly. Ineither case the living entity is the servant of God. This vision ofequality is perfect in a person in Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 30
yo mam pasyati sarvatra
sarvam ca mayi pasyatitasyaham na pranasyamisa ca me na pranasyati
SYNONYMSyah--whoever; mam--Me; pasyati--sees; sarvatra--everywhere; sarvam--
everything; ca--and; mayi--in Me; pasyati--he sees; tasya--his; aham--I; na--not; pranasyami--am lost; sah--he; ca--also; me--to Me; na--nor;pranasyati--is lost.
TRANSLATIONFor one who sees Me everywhere and sees everything in Me, I am never
lost, nor is he ever lost to Me.
PURPORTA person in Krsna consciousness certainly sees Lord Krsna everywhere,
and he sees everything in Krsna. Such a person may appear to see allseparate manifestations of the material nature, but in each and everyinstance he is conscious of Krsna, knowing that everything is themanifestation of Krsna's energy. Nothing can exist without Krsna, andKrsna is the Lord of everything--this is the basic principle of Krsnaconsciousness. Krsna consciousness is the development of love of Krsna--a position transcendental even to material liberation. It is the stagebeyond self-realization at which the devotee becomes one with Krsna inthe sense that Krsna becomes everything for the devotee and the devoteebecomes full in loving Krsna. An intimate relationship between the Lordand the devotee then exists. In that stage, the living entity attainshis immortality. Nor is the Personality of Godhead ever out of thesight of the devotee. To merge in Krsna is spiritual annihilation. Adevotee takes no such risk. It is stated in the Brahma-samhita (5.38):
premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayantiyam syamasundaram acintya-guna-svarupamgovindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami
"I worship the primeval Lord, Govinda, who is always seen by the
devotee whose eyes are anointed with the pulp of love. He is seen inHis eternal form of Syamasundara situated within the heart of thedevotee."
At this stage, Lord Krsna never disappears from the sight of the
devotee, nor does the devotee ever lose sight of the Lord. In the caseof a yogi who sees the Lord as Paramatma within the heart, the sameapplies. Such a yogi turns into a pure devotee and cannot bear to livefor a moment without seeing the Lord within himself.
TEXT 31
sarva-bhuta-sthitam yo mam
bhajaty ekatvam asthitahsarvatha vartamano 'pisa yogi mayi vartate
SYNONYMSsarva-bhuta-sthitam--situated in everyone's heart; yah--he who; mam--
unto Me; bhajati--serves in devotional service; ekatvam--oneness;asthitah--thus situated; sarvatha--in all respects; varta-manah--beingsituated; api--in spite of; sah--he; yogi--transcendentalist; mayi--unto Me; vartate--remains.
TRANSLATIONThe yogi who knows that I and the Supersoul within all creatures are
one worships Me and remains always in Me in all circumstances.
PURPORTA yogi who is practicing meditation on the Supersoul sees within
himself the plenary portion of Krsna as Visnu--with four hands, holdingconchshell, wheel, club and lotus flower. The yogi should know thatVisnu is not different from Krsna. Krsna in this form of Supersoul issituated in everyone's heart. Furthermore, there is no differencebetween the innumerable Supersouls present in the innumerable hearts ofliving entities. Nor is there a difference between a Krsna consciousperson always engaged in the transcendental loving service of Krsna anda perfect yogi engaged in meditation on the Supersoul. The yogi inKrsna consciousness--even though he may be engaged in variousactivities while in material existence--remains always situated inKrsna. This is confirmed in the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.2.187) ofSrila Rupa Gosvami: nikhilasv apy avasthasu jivan-muktah sa ucyate. Adevotee of the Lord, always acting in Krsna consciousness, isautomatically liberated. In the Narada-pancaratra this is confirmed inthis way:
dik-kalady-anavacchinne
krsne ceto vidhaya catan-mayo bhavati ksipramjivo brahmani yojayet
"By concentrating one's attention on the transcendental form of Krsna,
who is all-pervading and beyond time and space, one becomes absorbed inthinking of Krsna and then attains the happy state of transcendentalassociation with Him."Krsna consciousness is the highest stage of trance in yoga practice.This very understanding that Krsna is present as Paramatma ineveryone's heart makes the yogi faultless. The Vedas (Gopala-tapaniUpanisad 1.21) confirm this inconceivable potency of the Lord as
follows: eko 'pi san bahudha yo 'vabhati. "Although the Lord is one, He
is present in innumerable hearts as many." Similarly, in the smrti-sastra it is said:
eka eva paro visnuh
sarva-vyapi na samsayahaisvaryad rupam ekam casurya-vat bahudheyate
"Visnu is one, and yet He is certainly all-pervading. By His
inconceivable potency, in spite of His one form, He is presenteverywhere, as the sun appears in many places at once."
TEXT 32
atmaupamyena sarvatra
samam pasyati yo 'rjunasukham va yadi va duhkhamsa yogi paramo matah
SYNONYMSatma--self; aupamyena--by comparison; sarvatra--everywhere; samam--
equally; pasyati--sees; yah--he who; arjuna--O Arjuna; sukham--happiness; va--or; yadi--if; va--or; duhkham--distress; sah--such;yogi--transcendentalist; paramah--perfect; matah--considered.
TRANSLATIONHe is a perfect yogi who, by comparison to his own self, sees the true
equality of all beings, both in their happiness and distress, O Arjuna!
PURPORTOne who is Krsna conscious is a perfect yogi; he is aware of everyone's
happiness and distress by dint of his own personal experience. Thecause of the distress of a living entity is forgetfulness of hisrelationship with God. And the cause of happiness is knowing Krsna tobe the supreme enjoyer of all the activities of the human being. Krsnais the proprietor of all lands and planets, and the sincerest friend ofall living entities. The perfect yogi knows that the living being whois conditioned by the modes of material nature is subjected to thethreefold material miseries due to forgetfulness of his relationshipwith Krsna. Because one in Krsna consciousness is happy, he tries todistribute the knowledge of Krsna everywhere. Since the perfect yogitries to broadcast the importance of becoming Krsna conscious, he isthe best philanthropist in the world, and he is the dearest servitor ofthe Lord. Na ca tasman manusyesu kascin me priya-krttamah (Bg. 18.69).In other words, a devotee of the Lord always looks to the welfare ofall living entities, and in this way he is factually the friend ofeveryone. He is the best yogi because he does not desire perfection inyoga for his personal benefit, but tries for others also. He does notenvy his fellow living entities. Here is a contrast between a puredevotee of the Lord and a yogi interested only in his personalelevation. The yogi who has withdrawn to a secluded place in order tomeditate perfectly may not be as perfect as a devotee who is trying hisbest to turn every man toward Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 33
arjuna uvaca
yo 'yam yogas tvaya proktahsamyena madhusudanaetasyaham na pasyamicancalatvat sthitim sthiram
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; yah--the system; ayam--this; yogah--
mysticism; tvaya--by You; proktah--described; samyena--generally;madhu-sudana--O killer of the demon Madhu; etasya--of this; aham--I;na--do not; pasyami--see; cancalatvat--due to being restless; sthitim--situation; sthiram--stable.
TRANSLATIONArjuna said: O Madhusudana, the system of yoga which You have
summarized appears impractical and unendurable to me, for the mind isrestless and unsteady.
PURPORTThe system of mysticism described by Lord Krsna to Arjuna beginning
with the words sucau dese and ending with yogi paramah is here beingrejected by Arjuna out of a feeling of inability. It is not possiblefor an ordinary man to leave home and go to a secluded place in themountains or jungles to practice yoga in this Age of Kali. The presentage is characterized by a bitter struggle for a life of short duration.People are not serious about self-realization even by simple, practicalmeans, and what to speak of this difficult yoga system, which regulatesthe mode of living, the manner of sitting, selection of place, anddetachment of the mind from material engagements. As a practical man,Arjuna thought it was impossible to follow this system of yoga, eventhough he was favorably endowed in many ways. He belonged to the royalfamily and was highly elevated in terms of numerous qualities; he was agreat warrior, he had great longevity, and, above all, he was the mostintimate friend of Lord Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Fivethousand years ago, Arjuna had much better facilities than we do now,yet he refused to accept this system of yoga. In fact, we do not findany record in history of his practicing it at any time. Therefore thissystem must be considered generally impossible in this Age of Kali. Ofcourse it may be possible for some very few, rare men, but for thepeople in general it is an impossible proposal. If this were so fivethousand years ago, then what of the present day? Those who areimitating this yoga system in different so-called schools andsocieties, although complacent, are certainly wasting their time. Theyare completely in ignorance of the desired goal.
TEXT 34
cancalam hi manah krsna
pramathi balavad drdhamtasyaham nigraham manyevayor iva su-duskaram
SYNONYMS
cancalam--flickering; hi--certainly; manah--mind; krsna--O Krsna;
pramathi--agitating; bala-vat--strong; drdham--obstinate; tasya--its;aham--I; nigraham--subduing; manye--think; vayoh--of the wind; iva--like; su-duskaram--difficult.
TRANSLATIONFor the mind is restless, turbulent, obstinate and very strong, O Krsna
and to subdue it, I think, is more difficult than controlling the wind.
PURPORTThe mind is so strong and obstinate that it sometimes overcomes the
intelligence, although mind is supposed to be subservient to theintelligence. For a man in the practical world who has to fight so manyopposing elements, it is certainly very difficult to control the mind.Artificially, one may establish a mental equilibrium toward both friendand enemy, but ultimately no worldly man can do so, for this is moredifficult than controlling the raging wind. In the Vedic literature(Katha Upanisad 1.3.3-4) it is said:
atmanam rathinam viddhi
sariram ratham eva cabuddhim tu sarathim viddhimanah pragraham eva ca
indriyani hayan ahur
visayams tesu gocaranatmendriya-mano-yuktambhoktety ahur manisinah
"The individual is the passenger in the car of the material body, and
intelligence is the driver. Mind is the driving instrument, and thesenses are the horses. The self is thus the enjoyer or sufferer in theassociation of the mind and senses. So it is understood by greatthinkers." Intelligence is supposed to direct the mind, but the mind isso strong and obstinate that it often overcomes even one's ownintelligence. Such a strong mind is supposed to be controlled by thepractice of yoga, but such practice is never practical for a worldlyperson like Arjuna. And what can we say of modern man? The simile usedhere is appropriate: one cannot capture the blowing wind. And it iseven more difficult to capture the turbulent mind. The easiest way tocontrol the mind, as suggested by Lord Caitanya, is chanting "HareKrsna," the great mantra for deliverance, in all humility. The methodprescribed is sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayoh: one must engage one'smind fully in Krsna. Only then will there remain no other engagementsto agitate the mind.
TEXT 35
sri-bhagavan uvaca
asamsayam maha-bahomano durnigraham calamabhyasena tu kaunteyavairagyena ca grhyate
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Personality of Godhead said; asamsayam--
undoubtedly; maha-baho--O mighty-armed one; manah--mind; durnigraham--difficult to curb; calam--flickering; abhyasena--by practice; tu--but;kaunteya--O son of Kunti; vairagyena--by detachment; ca--also; grhyate--can be so controlled.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: O mighty-armed son of Kunti, it is undoubtedly
very difficult to curb the restless mind, but it is possible byconstant practice and by detachment.
PURPORTThe difficulty of controlling the obstinate mind, as expressed by
Arjuna, is accepted by the Personality of Godhead. But at the same timeHe suggests that by practice and detachment it is possible. What isthat practice? In the present age no one can observe the strict rulesand regulations of placing oneself in a sacred place, focusing the mindon the Supersoul, restraining the senses and mind, observing celibacy,remaining alone, etc. By the practice of Krsna consciousness, however,one engages in nine types of devotional service to the Lord. The firstand foremost of such devotional engagements is hearing about Krsna.This is a very powerful transcendental method for purging the mind ofall misgivings. The more one hears about Krsna, the more one becomesenlightened and detached from everything that draws the mind away fromKrsna. By detaching the mind from activities not devoted to the Lord,one can very easily learn vairagya. Vairagya means detachment frommatter and engagement of the mind in spirit. Impersonal spiritualdetachment is more difficult than attaching the mind to the activitiesof Krsna. This is practical because by hearing about Krsna one becomesautomatically attached to the Supreme Spirit. This attachment is calledparesanubhava, spiritual satisfaction. It is just like the feeling ofsatisfaction a hungry man has for every morsel of food he eats.Similarly, by discharge of devotional service one feels transcendentalsatisfaction as the mind becomes detached from material objectives. Itis something like curing a disease by expert treatment and appropriatediet. Hearing of the transcendental activities of Lord Krsna istherefore expert treatment for the mad mind, and eating the foodstuffoffered to Krsna is the appropriate diet for the suffering patient.This treatment is the process of Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 36
asamyatatmana yogo
dusprapa iti me matihvasyatmana tu yatatasakyo 'vaptum upayatah
SYNONYMSasamyata--unbridled; atmana--by the mind; yogah--self-realization;
dusprapah--difficult to obtain; iti--thus; me--My; matih--opinion;vasya--controlled; atmana--by the mind; tu--but; yatata--whileendeavoring; sakyah--practical; avaptum--to achieve; upayatah--appropriate means.
TRANSLATION
For one whose mind is unbridled, self-realization is difficult work.
But he whose mind is controlled and who strives by right means isassured of success. That is My opinion.
PURPORTThe Supreme Personality of Godhead declares that one who does not
accept the proper treatment to detach the mind from material engagementcan hardly achieve success in self-realization. Trying to practice yogawhile engaging the mind in material enjoyment is like trying to ignitea fire while pouring water on it. Similarly, yoga practice withoutmental control is a waste of time. Such a show of yoga practice may bematerially lucrative, but it is useless as far as spiritual realizationis concerned. Therefore, the mind must be controlled by engaging itconstantly in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. Unless oneis engaged in Krsna consciousness, he cannot steadily control the mind.A Krsna conscious person easily achieves the result of yoga practicewithout separate endeavor, but a yoga practitioner cannot achievesuccess without becoming Krsna conscious.
TEXT 37
arjuna uvaca
ayatih sraddhayopetoyogac calita-manasahaprapya yoga-samsiddhimkam gatim krsna gacchati
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; ayatih--unsuccessful transcendentalist;
sraddhaya--with faith; upetah--engaged; yogat--from the mystic link;calita--deviated; manasah--of one who has such a mind; aprapya--failing; yoga-samsiddhim--highest perfection in mysticism; kam--which;gatim--destination; krsna--O Krsna; gacchati--achieves.
TRANSLATIONArjuna said: What is the destination of the man of faith who does not
persevere, who in the beginning takes to the process of self-realization but who later desists due to worldly-mindedness and thusdoes not attain perfection in mysticism?
PURPORTThe path of self-realization or mysticism is described in the Bhagavad-
gita. The basic principle of self-realization is knowledge that theliving entity is not this material body but that he is different fromit and that his happiness is in eternal life, bliss and knowledge.These are transcendental, beyond both body and mind. Self-realizationis sought by the path of knowledge, the practice of the eightfoldsystem or by bhakti-yoga. In each of these processes one has to realizethe constitutional position of the living entity, his relationship withGod, and the activities whereby he can reestablish the lost link andachieve the highest perfectional stage of Krsna consciousness.Following any of the above-mentioned three methods, one is sure to
reach the supreme goal sooner or later. This was asserted by the Lord
in the Second Chapter: even a little endeavor on the transcendentalpath offers a great hope for deliverance. Out of these three methods,the path of bhakti-yoga is especially suitable for this age because itis the most direct method of God realization. To be doubly assured,Arjuna is asking Lord Krsna to confirm His former statement. One maysincerely accept the path of self-realization, but the process ofcultivation of knowledge and the practice of the eightfold yoga systemare generally very difficult for this age. Therefore, despite constantendeavor one may fail for many reasons. First of all, one may not befollowing the process. To pursue the transcendental path is more orless to declare war on the illusory energy. Consequently, whenever aperson tries to escape the clutches of the illusory energy, she triesto defeat the practitioner by various allurements. A conditioned soulis already allured by the modes of material energy, and there is everychance of being allured again, even while performing transcendentaldisciplines. This is called yogac calita-manasah: deviation from thetranscendental path. Arjuna is inquisitive to know the results ofdeviation from the path of self-realization.
TEXT 38
kaccin nobhaya-vibhrastas
chinnabhram iva nasyatiapratistho maha-bahovimudho brahmanah pathi
SYNONYMSkaccit--whether; na--not; ubhaya--both; vibhrastah--deviated from;
chinna--fallen; abhram--cloud; iva--like; nasyati--perishes;apratisthah--without any position; maha-baho--O mighty-armed Krsna;vimudhah--bewildered; brahmanah--of transcendence; pathi--on the path.
TRANSLATIONO mighty-armed Krsna, does not such a man, being deviated from the path
of transcendence, perish like a riven cloud, with no position in anysphere?
PURPORTThere are two ways to progress. Those who are materialists have no
interest in transcendence; therefore they are more interested inmaterial advancement by economic development, or in promotion to thehigher planets by appropriate work. When one takes to the path oftranscendence, one has to cease all material activities and sacrificeall forms of so-called material happiness. If the aspiringtranscendentalist fails, then he apparently loses both ways; in otherwords, he can enjoy neither material happiness nor spiritual success.He has no position; he is like a riven cloud. A cloud in the skysometimes deviates from a small cloud and joins a big one. But if itcannot join a big one, then it is blown away by the wind and becomes anonentity in the vast sky. The brahmanah pathi is the path oftranscendental realization through knowing oneself to be spiritual inessence, part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, who is manifested asBrahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan. Lord Sri Krsna is the fullestmanifestation of the Supreme Absolute Truth, and therefore one who is
surrendered to the Supreme Person is a successful transcendentalist. To
reach this goal of life through Brahman and Paramatma realization takesmany, many births (bahunam janmanam ante). Therefore the supermost pathof transcendental realization is bhakti-yoga, or Krsna consciousness,the direct method.
TEXT 39
etan me samsayam krsna
chettum arhasy asesatahtvad-anyah samsayasyasyachetta na hy upapadyate
SYNONYMSetat--this is; me--my; samsayam--doubt; krsna--O Krsna; chettum--to
dispel; arhasi--requested to do; asesatah--completely; tvat--than You;anyah--without; samsayasya--of the doubt; asya--of this; chetta--remover; na--never; hi--certainly; upapadyate--to be found.
TRANSLATIONThis is my doubt, O Krsna, and I ask You to dispel it completely. But
for Yourself, no one is to be found who can destroy this doubt.
PURPORTKrsna is the perfect knower of past, present and future. In the
beginning of the Bhagavad-gita, the Lord said that all living entitiesexisted individually in the past, they exist now in the present, andthey continue to retain individual identity in the future, even afterliberation from the material entanglement. So He has already cleared upthe question of the future of the individual living entity. Now, Arjunawants to know of the future of the unsuccessful transcendentalist. Noone is equal to or above Krsna, and certainly the so-called great sagesand philosophers who are at the mercy of material nature cannot equalHim. Therefore the verdict of Krsna is the final and complete answer toall doubts, because He knows past, present and future perfectly--but noone knows Him. Krsna and Krsna conscious devotees alone can know whatis what.
TEXT 40
sri-bhagavan uvaca
partha naiveha namutravinasas tasya vidyatena hi kalyana-krt kasciddurgatim tata gacchati
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; partha--O
son of Prtha; na eva--never is it so; iha--in this material world; na--never; amutra--in the next life; vinasah--destruction; tasya--his;vidyate--exists; na--never; hi--certainly; kalyana-krt--one who isengaged in auspicious activities; kascit--anyone; durgatim--degradation; tata--thereafter; gacchati--goes.
TRANSLATION
The Blessed Lord said: Son of Prtha, a transcendentalist engaged in
auspicious activities does not meet with destruction either in thisworld or in the spiritual world; one who does good, My friend, is neverovercome by evil.
PURPORTIn the Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.5.17) Sri Narada Muni instructs Vyasadeva
as follows:
tyaktva sva-dharmam caranambujam harer
bhajann apakvo 'tha patet tato yadiyatra kva vabhadram abhud amusya kimko vartha apto 'bhajatam sva-dharmatah
"If someone gives up all material prospects and takes complete shelter
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, there is no loss or degradationin any way. On the other hand a nondevotee may fully engage in hisoccupational duties and yet not gain anything." For material prospects,there are many activities both scriptural and customary. Atranscendentalist is supposed to give up all material activities forthe sake of spiritual advancement in life, Krsna consciousness. One mayargue that by Krsna consciousness one may attain the highest perfectionif it is completed, but if one does not attain such a perfectionalstage, then he loses both materially and spiritually. It is enjoined inthe scriptures that one has to suffer the reaction of not executingprescribed duties; therefore one who fails to discharge transcendentalactivities properly becomes subjected to these reactions. TheBhagavatam assures the unsuccessful transcendentalist that there needbe no worries. Even though he may be subjected to the reaction of notperfectly executing prescribed duties, he is still not a loser, becauseauspicious Krsna consciousness is never forgotten, and one so engagedwill continue to be so even if he is lowborn in the next life. On theother hand, one who simply follows strictly the prescribed duties neednot necessarily attain auspicious results if he is lacking in Krsnaconsciousness.The purport may be understood as follows: humanity may be divided intotwo sections, namely, the regulated and the nonregulated. Those who areengaged simply in bestial sense gratifications without knowledge oftheir next life or spiritual salvation belong to the nonregulatedsection. And those who follow the principles of prescribed duties inthe scriptures are classified amongst the regulated section. Thenonregulated section, both civilized and noncivilized, educated andnoneducated, strong and weak, are full of animal propensities. Theiractivities are never auspicious, because while enjoying the animalpropensities of eating, sleeping, defending and mating, theyperpetually remain in material existence, which is always miserable. Onthe other hand, those who are regulated by scriptural injunctions andthus gradually rise to Krsna consciousness certainly progress in life.Those who are then following the path of auspiciousness can be dividedinto three sections, namely 1) the followers of scriptural rules andregulations who are enjoying material prosperity, 2) those who aretrying to find out ultimate liberation from material existence, and 3)those who are devotees in Krsna consciousness. Those who are followingthe rules and regulations of the scriptures for material happiness maybe further divided into two classes: those who are fruitive workers and
those who desire no fruit for sense gratification. Those who are after
fruitive results for sense gratification may be elevated to a higherstandard of life--even to the higher planets; but still, because theyare not free from material existence, they are not following the trulyauspicious path. The only auspicious activities are those which leadone to liberation. Any activity which is not aimed at ultimate self-realization or liberation from the material bodily concept of life isnot at all auspicious. Activity in Krsna consciousness is the onlyauspicious activity, and anyone who voluntarily accepts all bodilydiscomforts for the sake of making progress on the path of Krsnaconsciousness can be called a perfect transcendentalist under severeausterity. And because the eightfold yoga system is directed toward theultimate realization of Krsna consciousness, such practice is alsoauspicious, and no one who is trying his best in this matter need feardegradation.
TEXT 41
prapya punya-krtam lokan
usitva sasvatih samahsucinam srimatam geheyoga-bhrasto 'bhijayate
SYNONYMSprapya--after achieving; punya-krtam--of those who performed pious
activities; lokan--planets; usitva--after dwelling; sasvatih--many;samah--years; sucinam--of the pious; sri-matam--of the prosperous;gehe--in the house of; yoga-bhrastah--one who is fallen from the pathof self-realization; abhijayate--takes his birth.
TRANSLATIONThe unsuccessful yogi, after many, many years of enjoyment on the
planets of the pious living entities, is born into a family ofrighteous people, or into a family of rich aristocracy.
PURPORTThe unsuccessful yogis are divided into two classes: one is fallen
after very little progress, and one is fallen after long practice ofyoga. The yogi who falls after a short period of practice goes to thehigher planets where pious living entities are allowed to enter. Afterprolonged life there, he is sent back again to this planet, to takebirth in the family of a righteous brahmana vaisnava or of aristocraticmerchants.The real purpose of yoga practice is to achieve the highest perfectionof Krsna consciousness. But those who do not persevere to such anextent and fail due to material allurements are allowed, by the graceof the Lord, to make full utilization of their material propensities.And after that, they are given opportunities to live prosperous livesin righteous or aristocratic families. Those who are born in suchfamilies may take advantage of the facilities and try to elevatethemselves to full Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 42
atha va yoginam eva
kule bhavati dhimatam
etad dhi durlabhataramloke janma yad idrsam
SYNONYMSatha va--or; yoginam--of learned transcendentalists; eva--certainly;
kule--in the family of; bhavati--takes birth; dhi-matam--of those whoare endowed with great wisdom; etat--this; hi--certainly; durlabha-taram--very rare; loke--in this world; janma--birth; yat--that which;idrsam--like this.
TRANSLATIONOr he takes his birth in a family of transcendentalists who are surely
great in wisdom. Verily, such a birth is rare in this world.
PURPORTBirth in a family of yogis or transcendentalists--those with great
wisdom--is praised herein because the child born in such a familyreceives a spiritual impetus from the very beginning of his life. It isespecially the case in the acarya or gosvami families. Such familiesare very learned and devoted by tradition and training, and thus theybecome spiritual masters. In India there are many such acarya families,but they have now degenerated due to insufficient education andtraining. By the grace of the Lord, there are still families thatfoster transcendentalists generation after generation. It is certainlyvery fortunate to take birth in such families. Fortunately, both ourspiritual master, Om Visnupada Sri Srimad Bhaktisiddhanta SarasvatiGosvami Maharaja, and our humble self, had the opportunity to takebirth in such families, by the grace of the Lord, and both of us weretrained in the devotional service of the Lord from the very beginningof our lives. Later on we met by the order of the transcendentalsystem.
TEXT 43
tatra tam buddhi-samyogam
labhate paurva-dehikamyatate ca tato bhuyahsamsiddhau kuru-nandana
SYNONYMStatra--thereupon; tam--that; buddhi-samyogam--revival of such
consciousness; labhate--regains; paurva--previous; dehikam--bodilyconsciousness; yatate--he endeavors; ca--also; tatah--thereafter;bhuyah--again; samsiddhau--for perfection; kuru-nandana--O son of Kuru.
TRANSLATIONOn taking such a birth, he again revives the divine consciousness of
his previous life, and he tries to make further progress in order toachieve complete success, O son of Kuru.
PURPORT
King Bharata, who took his third birth in the family of a good
brahmana, is an example of good birth for the revival of previoustranscendental consciousness. King Bharata was the emperor of theworld, and since his time this planet is known among the demigods asBharata-varsa. Formerly it was known as Ilavrta-varsa. The emperor, atan early age, retired for spiritual perfection but failed to achievesuccess. In his next life he took birth in the family of a goodbrahmana and was known as Jada Bharata because he always remainedsecluded and did not talk to anyone. And later on, he was discovered asthe greatest transcendentalist by King Rahugana. From his life it isunderstood that transcendental endeavors, or the practice of yoga,never go in vain. By the grace of the Lord the transcendentalist getsrepeated opportunities for complete perfection in Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 44
purvabhyasena tenaiva
hriyate hy avaso 'pi sahjijnasur api yogasyasabda-brahmativartate
SYNONYMSpurva--previous; abhyasena--practice; tena--by the influence of that;
eva--certainly; hriyate--is attracted; hi--surely; avasah--helpless;api--also; sah--he; jijnasuh--willing to know; api--so; yogasya--ofyoga; sabda-brahma--ritualistic principles of scripture; ativartate--transcends.
TRANSLATIONBy virtue of the divine consciousness of his previous life, he
automatically becomes attracted to the yogic principles--even withoutseeking them. Such an inquisitive transcendentalist, striving for yoga,stands always above the ritualistic principles of the scriptures.
PURPORTAdvanced yogis are not very much attracted to the rituals of the
scriptures, but they automatically become attracted to the yogaprinciples, which can elevate them to complete Krsna consciousness, thehighest yoga perfection. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.33.7), suchdisregard of Vedic rituals by the advanced transcendentalists isexplained as follows:
aho bata sva-paco 'to gariyan
yaj-jihvagre vartate nama tubhyamtepus tapas te juhuvuh sasnur aryabrahmanucur nama grnanti ye te
"O my Lord! Persons who chant the holy names of Your Lordship are far,
far advanced in spiritual life, even if born in families of dog-eaters.Such chanters have undoubtedly performed all kinds of austerities andsacrifices, bathed in all sacred places, and finished all scripturalstudies."The famous example of this was presented by Lord Caitanya, who acceptedThakura Haridasa as one of His most important disciples. AlthoughThakura Haridasa happened to take his birth in a Muslim family, he was
elevated to the post of namacarya by Lord Caitanya due to his rigidly
attended principle of chanting three hundred thousand holy names of theLord daily: Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama,Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. And because he chanted the holy nameof the Lord constantly, it is understood that in his previous life hemust have passed through all the ritualistic methods of the Vedas,known as sabda-brahma. Unless, therefore, one is purified, one cannottake to the principle of Krsna consciousness or become engaged inchanting the holy name of the Lord, Hare Krsna.
TEXT 45
prayatnad yatamanas tu
yogi samsuddha-kilbisahaneka-janma-samsiddhastato yati param gatim
SYNONYMSprayatnat--by rigid practice; yatamanah--one who endeavors; tu--but;
yogi--such a transcendentalist; samsuddha--washed off; kilbisah--allkinds of sins; aneka--many, many; janma--births; samsiddhah--soachieved perfection; tatah--thereafter; yati--attains; param--highest;gatim--destination.
TRANSLATIONBut when the yogi engages himself with sincere endeavor in making
further progress, being washed of all contaminations, then ultimately,after many, many births of practice, he attains the supreme goal.
PURPORTA person born in a particularly righteous, aristocratic or sacred
family becomes conscious of his favorable condition for executing yogapractice. With determination, therefore, he begins the unfinished task,and thus he completely cleanses himself of all material contaminations.When he is finally free from all contaminations, he attains the supremeperfection--Krsna consciousness. Krsna consciousness is the perfectstage of being freed of all contaminations. This is confirmed in theBhagavad-gita (7.28):
yesam tv anta-gatam papam
jananam punya-karmanamte dvandva-moha-nirmuktabhajante mam drdha-vratah
"After many, many births of executing pious activities, when one is
completely freed from all contaminations, and from all illusorydualities, one then becomes engaged in the transcendental lovingservice of the Lord."
TEXT 46
tapasvibhyo 'dhiko yogi
jnanibhyo 'pi mato 'dhikahkarmibhyas cadhiko yogitasmad yogi bhavarjuna
SYNONYMS
tapasvibhyah--than the ascetic; adhikah--greater; yogi--the yogi;
jnanibhyah--than the wise; api--also; matah--considered; adhikah--greater than; karmibhyah--than the fruitive worker; ca--also; adhikah--greater than; yogi--the yogi; tasmat--therefore; yogi--atranscendentalist; bhava--just become; arjuna--O Arjuna.
TRANSLATIONA yogi is greater than the ascetic, greater than the empiricist and
greater than the fruitive worker. Therefore, O Arjuna, in allcircumstances, be a yogi.
PURPORTWhen we speak of yoga we refer to linking up our consciousness with the
Supreme Absolute Truth. Such a process is named differently by variouspractitioners in terms of the particular method adopted. When thelinking up process is predominantly in fruitive activities it is calledkarma-yoga, when it is predominantly empirical it is called jnana-yoga,and when it is predominantly in a devotional relationship with theSupreme Lord it is called bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga or Krsnaconsciousness is the ultimate perfection of all yogas, as will beexplained in the next verse. The Lord has confirmed herein thesuperiority of yoga, but He has not mentioned that it is better thanbhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga is full spiritual knowledge, and as suchnothing can excel it. Asceticism without self-knowledge is imperfect.Empiric knowledge without surrender to the Supreme Lord is alsoimperfect. And fruitive work without Krsna consciousness is a waste oftime. Therefore, the most highly praised form of yoga performancementioned here is bhakti-yoga, and this is still more clearly explainedin the next verse.
TEXT 47
yoginam api sarvesam
mad-gatenantar-atmanasraddhavan bhajate yo mamsa me yuktatamo matah
SYNONYMSyoginam--of all yogis; api--also; sarvesam--all types of; mat-gatena--
abiding in Me; antah-atmana--always thinking of Me within; sraddha-van--in full faith; bhajate--renders transcendental loving service; yah--one who; mam--Me (the Supreme Lord); sah--he; me--Mine; yukta-tamah--the greatest yogi; matah--is considered.
TRANSLATIONAnd of all yogis, he who always abides in Me with great faith,
worshiping Me in transcendental loving service, is most intimatelyunited with Me in yoga and is the highest of all.
PURPORT
The word bhajate is significant here. Bhajate has its root in the verb
bhaj, which is used when there is need of service. The English word"worship" cannot be used in the same sense as bhaj. Worship means toadore, or to show respect and honor to the worthy one. But service withlove and faith is especially meant for the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. One can avoid worshiping a respectable man or a demigod andmay be called discourteous, but one cannot avoid serving the SupremeLord without being thoroughly condemned. Every living entity is partand parcel of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and thus every livingentity is intended to serve the Supreme Lord by his own constitution.Failing to do this, he falls down. The Bhagavatam (11.5.3) confirmsthis as follows:
ya esam purusam saksad
atma-prabhavam isvaramna bhajanty avajanantisthanad bhrastah patanty adhah
"Anyone who does not render service and neglects his duty unto the
primeval Lord, who is the source of all living entities, will certainlyfall down from his constitutional position."In this verse also the word bhajanti is used. Therefore, bhajanti isapplicable to the Supreme Lord only, whereas the word "worship" can beapplied to demigods or to any other common living entity. The wordavajananti, used in this verse of Srimad-Bhagavatam, is also found inthe Bhagavad-gita. Avajananti mam mudhah: "Only the fools and rascalsderide the Supreme Personality of Godhead Lord Krsna." Such fools takeit upon themselves to write commentaries on the Bhagavad-gita withoutan attitude of service to the Lord. Consequently they cannot properlydistinguish between the word bhajanti and the word "worship."The culmination of all kinds of yoga practices lies in bhakti yoga. Allother yogas are but means to come to the point of bhakti in bhakti-yoga. Yoga actually means bhakti-yoga; all other yogas are progressionstoward the destination of bhakti-yoga. From the beginning of karma-yogato the end of bhakti-yoga is a long way to self-realization. Karma-yoga, without fruitive results, is the beginning of this path. Whenkarma-yoga increases in knowledge and renunciation, the stage is calledjnana-yoga. When jnana-yoga increases in meditation on the Supersoul bydifferent physical processes, and the mind is on Him, it is calledastanga-yoga. And, when one surpasses the astanga-yoga he comes to thepoint of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsna, it is called bhaktiyoga, the culmination. Factually, bhakti-yoga is the ultimate goal, butto analyze bhakti-yoga minutely one has to understand these otheryogas. The yogi who is progressive is therefore on the true path ofeternal good fortune. One who sticks to a particular point and does notmake further progress is called by that particular name: karma-yogi,jnana-yogi or dhyana-yogi, raja-yogi, hatha-yogi, etc. If one isfortunate enough to come to the point of bhakti-yoga, it is to beunderstood that he has surpassed all other yogas. Therefore, to becomeKrsna conscious is the highest stage of yoga, just as, when we speak ofHimalayan, we refer to the world's highest mountains, of which thehighest peak, Mount Everest, is considered to be the culmination.It is by great fortune that one comes to Krsna consciousness on thepath of bhakti-yoga to become well situated according to the Vedicdirection. The ideal yogi concentrates his attention on Krsna, who iscalled Syamasundara, who is as beautifully colored as a cloud, whoselotus-like face is as effulgent as the sun, whose dress is brilliantwith jewels and whose body is flower-garlanded. Illuminating all sides
