Name: ___________________________________________ Date: ___________________
Bhagavadgita-chapter-5
1. Inthe begining of 5th chapter what Lord advice to Arjuna? BG 5.1
Lord says that work in devotional service is better than dry mental speculation.
2. How Lord Krishna confused Arjuna`s determination? BG 5.1
by simultaneously stressing the importance of both work in devotion and inaction in knowledge, K ṛṣṇ a has perplexed Arjuna and
confused his determination.
3. What Arjuna inquires Lord? BG 5.1
whether he should cease work altogether or work with full knowledge.
4. What Lord Krishna replied to Arjuna about renunciation of work and work in devotion? BG 5.2
The renunciation of work and work in devotion are both good for liberation. But, of the two, work in devotional service is better
than renunciation of work.
5. How continuing material bondage perpetually is possible? BG 5.2
As long as one is engaged in activities aimed at improving the standard of bodily comfort, one is sure to transmigrate to different
types of bodies, thereby continuing material bondage perpetually.
6. What people don now know about their present body? BG 5.2
People are mad after sense gratiﬁcation, and they do not know that this present body, which is full of miseries, is a result of
one’s fruitive activities in the past.
7. How One is considered to be a failure in life? BG 5.2
One is considered to be a failure in life as long as he makes no inquiry about his real identity. As long as he does not know his
real identity,
8. How one have the opportunity to get out of the bondage of material existence? BG 5.2
one must develop a love for devotional service to Vāsudeva. Only then can one have the opportunity to get out of the bondage of
material existence.”
9. How one can escape from material bondage? BG 5.2
One has to act in the status of spirit soul, otherwise there is no escape from material bondage.
10. What makes K ṛṣṇ a consciousness is incomplete? BG 5.2
Renunciation without K ṛṣṇ a consciousness is incomplete
11. When nothing belongs to anyone. Then where is the question of renunciation? BG 5.2
One who knows that everything is K ṛṣṇ a’s property is always situated in renunciation. Since everything belongs to K ṛṣṇ a,
everything should be employed in the service of K ṛṣṇ a
12. Who is known to be always renounced? BG 5.3
One who neither hates nor desires the fruits of his activities is known to be always renounced.
13. How a renounced person free from all dualities? BG 5.3
renounced person free from all dualities, easily overcomes material bondage and is completely liberated,
14. How the knowledge qualitatively and quantitatively correct? BG 5.3
He knows fully well that K ṛṣṇ a is the whole and that he is part and parcel of K ṛṣṇ a. Such knowledge is perfect because it is
qualitatively and quantitatively correct.
15. Why the concept of oneness with K ṛṣṇ a is incorrect? BG 5.3
The concept of oneness with K ṛṣṇ a is incorrect because the part cannot be equal to the whole. Knowledge that one is one in
quality yet different in quantity is correct transcendental knowledge leading one to become full in himself,
16. What is the aim of the analytical study of the material world? BG 5.4
The aim of the analytical study of the material world is to ﬁnd the soul of existence
17. Who is the soul of the material world? BG 5.4
A. Brahma B. Vishnu 
C. Iswara D. Indra
18. What is the real student of Sā ṅ khya philosophy ﬁnds? BG 5.4
The real student of Sā ṅ khya philosophy ﬁnds the root of the material world, Vi ṣṇ u,
19. What is the real student of Karma philosophy ﬁnds? BG 5.4
The real student of karma Philosophy find in perfect knowledge, engages himself in the service of the Lord.
20. What kind of people say Sā ṅ khya and karma-yoga are not the same? BG 5.4
Those who do not know the ultimate end say that the purposes of Sā ṅ khya and karma-yoga are not the same, but one who is
learned knows the unifying aim in these different processes.
21. What is the ultimate goal of life? BG 5.5
the ultimate goal of life is self-realization,
22. What we can conclude by Sā ṅ khya philosophical research? BG 5.5
By Sā ṅ khya philosophical research one comes to the conclusion that a living entity is not a part and parcel of the material world
but of the supreme spirit whole.
23. What are two classes of sannyāsīs? Bg 5.6
Māyāvādī sannyāsīs and Vai ṣṇ ava sannyāsīs
24. what the Māyāvādī sannyāsīs are engaged in? BG 5.6
The Māyāvādī sannyāsīs are engaged in the study of Sā ṅ khya philosophy,
25. What the Vai ṣṇ ava sannyāsīs are engaged in? BG 5.6
the Vai ṣṇ ava sannyāsīs are engaged in the study of Bhāgavatam philosophy, which affords the proper commentary on the
Vedānta-sūtras.
26. What is Śārīraka-bhā ṣ ya? BG 5.6
The Māyāvādī sannyāsīs also study the Vedānta-sūtras, but use their own commentary, called Śārīraka-bhā ṣ ya,
27. Who wrote Śārīraka-bhā ṣ ya? BG 5.6
Śārīraka-bhā ṣ ya written by Śa ṅ karācārya.
28. The students of the Bhāgavata school are engaged in what services? Bg 5.6
The students of the Bhāgavata school are engaged in the devotional service of the Lord, according to pāñcarātrikī regulations,
and therefore the Vai ṣṇ ava sannyāsīs have multiple engagements in the transcendental service of the Lord.
29. How Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam becomes troublesome for Māyāvādī sannyāsīs? BG 5.6
their studies become very tedious, they sometimes become tired of Brahman speculation, and thus they take shelter of the
Bhāgavatam without proper understanding. Consequently their study of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam becomes troublesome.
30. How Māyāvādī sannyāsīs are fall in to material engagements? BG 5.6
The Māyāvādī sannyāsīs sometimes fall down from the path of self-realization and again enter into material activities of a
philanthropic and altruistic nature, which are nothing but material engagements.
31. How every living being dear to K ṛṣṇ a conscious person? BG 5.7
One who is on the path of liberation by K ṛṣṇ a consciousness is very dear to every living being, and every living being is dear to
him.
32. How a K ṛṣṇ a conscious person is pure in consciousness? BG 5.7
Because one who works in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness is servant to all, he is very dear to everyone. And because everyone is satisﬁed by
his work, he is pure in consciousness.
33. How a person in the divine consciousness actually does nothing at all? BG 5.8-9
A person in the divine consciousness, although engaged in seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, eating, moving about, sleeping and
breathing, always knows within himself that he actually does nothing at all.
34. How a K ṛṣṇ a conscious person is always free? BG 5.8-9
In material consciousness, the senses are engaged in sense gratiﬁcation, but in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness the senses are engaged in the
satisfaction of K ṛṣṇ a’s senses. Therefore, the K ṛṣṇ a conscious person is always free,
35. How a K ṛṣṇ a conscious person is never affected by the actions of the senses? BG 5.8-9
Activities such as seeing and hearing are actions of the senses meant for receiving knowledge, whereas moving, speaking,
evacuating, etc., are actions of the senses meant for work.
36. Why a K ṛṣṇ a conscious person cannot perform any act except in the service of the Lord ? BG 5.8-9
because he knows that he is the eternal servitor of the Lord
37. How K ṛṣṇa consciousness compared to lotus? BG 5.10
One who performs his duty without attachment, surrendering the results unto the Supreme Lord, is unaffected by sinful action,
as the lotus leaf is untouched by water.
38. What is called sad-ācāra? BG 5.11
puriﬁed activities, which are generally called sad-ācāra,
39. What kind of person thinks that He himself belongs to K ṛṣṇ a, and the body too belongs to K ṛṣṇ a.
A person acting in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness
40. What is the perfect stage of K ṛṣṇ a consciousness? BG 5.11
to K ṛṣṇ a’s service, he is at once dovetailed with K ṛṣṇ a. He is one with K ṛṣṇ a and is devoid of the false ego that leads one to
believe that he is the body, etc. This is the perfect stage of K ṛṣṇ a consciousness.
41. What is the difference between a person in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness and a person in bodily consciousness?BG 5.12
is that the former is attached to K ṛṣṇ a whereas the latter is attached to the results of his activities.
42. What is explained in Bhāgavatam the cause of anxiety? BG 5.12
In the Bhāgavatam, the cause of anxiety over the result of an activity is explained as being one’s functioning in the conception of
duality, that is, without knowledge of the Absolute Truth.
43. What is the secret of K ṛṣṇ a consciousness? BG 5.12
realization that there is no existence besides K ṛṣṇ a is the platform of peace and fearlessness
44. Who lives in the city of nine gates? BG 5.13
The embodied soul lives in the city of nine gates.
45. Who is the controller of all living entities all over the universe? BG 5.13
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is living within the body of a living entity, is the controller of all living entities all over
the universe.
46. The body consists of how many gates? BG 5.13
A. 6 B. 8
C. 9  D. 5
47. What are the nine gates of body? BG 5.13
two eyes, two nostrils, two ears, one mouth, the anus and the genitals
48. Who can become as free as the Lord, even while in the body? Bg 5.13
When the living entity identiﬁes himself with the Lord within himself, he becomes just as free as the Lord, even while in the
body.
49. Who will be free from both the outer and inner activities of the material body? B 5.13
a K ṛṣṇ a conscious person is free from both the outer and inner activities of the material body.
50. What is another nature – called inferior – of the Lord? BG 5.14
The living entity is one of the energies or natures of the Supreme Lord but is distinct from matter, which is another nature –
called inferior – of the Lord.
51. When living entities becomes free from the reactions as well? BG 5.14
As soon as the living entity becomes aloof from the activities of the body, he becomes free from the reactions as well.
52. How one can get saved from midst of the material ocean? BG 5.14
The waves of the ocean are tossing him, and he has no control over them. His best solution is to get out of the water by
transcendental K ṛṣṇ a consciousness.
53. What is the Sanskrit word vibhu means? BG 5.15
The Sanskrit word vibhu means the Supreme Lord who is full of unlimited knowledge, riches, strength, fame, beauty and
renunciation. He is always satisﬁed in Himself,
54. When the supreme Lord chain of action and reaction begins? BG 5.15
the living entity, bewildered by ignorance, desires to be put into certain conditions of life, and thereby his chain of action and
reaction begins.
55. What the living entity is called? BG 5.15
the living entity is a ṇ u, or atomic.
56. Who can understand the desires of the individual soul? Bg 5.15
The Lord is the constant companion of the living entity as Paramātmā, or the Supersoul, and therefore He can understand the
desires of the individual soul,
57. Why the individual is not omnipotent in fulﬁlling his desires? BG 5.15
The Lord fulﬁlls his desire as he deserves: Man proposes and God disposes.The Lord, however, can fulﬁll all desires,
58. When Lord takes special care of his devotee? BG 5.15
when one desires K ṛṣṇ a, the Lord takes special care and encourages one to desire in such a way that one can attain to Him and
be eternally happy.
59. How The Lord engages the living entity in different activities? BG 5.15
The Lord engages the living entity in pious activities so that he may be elevated. The Lord engages him in impious activities so
that he may go to hell.
60. Does Lord likes of hates anyone? BG 5.15
The Lord neither hates nor likes anyone, though He appears to.
61. What is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā about knowledge? BG 5.16
Knowledge is always highly esteemed
62. what is that knowledge? BG 5.16
Perfect knowledge is achieved when one surrenders unto K ṛṣṇ a,After passing through many, many births, when one perfect in
knowledge surrenders unto K ṛṣṇ a, or when one attains K ṛṣṇ a consciousness
63. How everything is revealed to K ṛṣṇ a conscious person? BG 5.16
everything is revealed to him, as everything is revealed by the sun in the daytime.
64. What is real knowledge? BG 5.16
Identity with individuality in spiritual life is real knowledge.
65. What The whole Bhagavad-gītā centers around the declaration? BG 5.17
The Supreme Transcendental Truth is Lord K ṛṣṇ a. The whole Bhagavad-gītā centers around the declaration that K ṛṣṇ a is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is the version of all Vedic literature.
66. What is Para-tattva means? Bg 5.17
Para-tattva means the Supreme Reality, who is understood by the knowers of the Supreme as Brahman, Paramātmā and
Bhagavān.
67. What is meaningless from the viewpoint of a learned transcendentalist? BG 5.18
The brāhma ṇ a and the outcaste may be different from the social point of view, or a dog, a cow and an elephant may be different
from the point of view of species, but these differences of body are meaningless from the viewpoint of a learned
transcendentalist.
68. Why The Lord is ﬂawless? BG 5.19
because He is without attraction or hatred.
69. How a living entity enter into the spiritual sky? BG 5.19
when a living entity is without attraction or hatred, he also becomes ﬂawless and eligible to enter into the spiritual sky.
70. What is called sthira-buddhi? BG 5.20
steadiness of mind is called sthira-buddhi,
71. In what kind of state a person get sthira-buddhi? BG 5.20
He is therefore not joyful in achieving something, nor does he lament in losing anything which is related to his body. This
steadiness of mind is called sthira-buddhi, or self-intelligence.
72. What are the symptoms of the self-realized person? BG 5.20
The ﬁrst symptom is that he is not illusioned by the false identiﬁcation of the body with his true self. He knows perfectly well
that he is not this body but is the fragmental portion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
73. What is called Brahman realization? BG 5.20
self-intelligent person knows his constitutional position perfectly well, without falsely trying to become one with the Supreme in
all respects. This is called Brahman realization, or self-realization.
74. Why a liberated soul is not interested in anything? BG 5.22
A liberated soul is not interested in anything which is temporary.
75. Why Personality of Godhead, is also known as Rāma? BG 5.22
The mystics derive unlimited transcendental pleasures from the Absolute Truth, and therefore the Supreme Absolute Truth, the
Personality of Godhead, is also known as Rāma
76. What is causes of continuous material existence? BG 5.22
those who are true yogīs or learned transcendentalists are not attracted by sense pleasures, which are the causes of continuous
material existence.
77. What will happen if one is addicted to material pleasures? BG 5.22
the more he is entrapped by material miseries.
78. If one wants to make steady progress on the path of self-realization what he should do? Bg 5.23
he must try to control the forces of the material senses.
79. Who is called gosvāmī, or svāmī? BG 5.23
One who is able to control the forces of all these different senses, and the mind, is called gosvāmī, or svāmī.
80. What all forces of different senses? Bg 5.23
There are the forces of talk, forces of anger, forces of mind, forces of the stomach, forces of the genitals, and forces of the
tongue.
81. Who is the perfect mystic? BG 5.24
One whose happiness is within, who is active and rejoices within, and whose aim is inward is actually the perfect mystic.
82. Which state is called brahma-bhūta? BG 5.24
sit silently at any place and enjoy the activities of life from within. Such a liberated person no longer desires external material
happiness. This state is called brahma-bhūta,A liberated person
83. What is The real cause of one’s difﬁculties in the hard struggle for life? Bg 5.25
The real cause of one’s difﬁculties in the hard struggle for life may be found in one’s forgetfulness of his relationship with the
Supreme Lord.
84. Who is the best of all? Bg 5.26
Of the saintly persons who are constantly engaged in striving toward salvation, one who is in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness is the best of
all.
85. How fish, tortois and bird maintain their offspring? BG 5.26
A. By vision, by meditation and by touch only do the ﬁsh, the tortoise and the birds maintain their offspring.
86. How ﬁsh brings up its offspring? BG 5.26
The ﬁsh brings up its offspring simply by looking at them.
87. How the tortoise brings up its offspring? Bg 5.26
The tortoise brings up its offspring simply by meditation. The eggs of the tortoise are laid on land, and the tortoise meditates on
the eggs while in the water.
88. Whic state of life is called brahma-nirvā ṇ a? BG 5.26
K ṛṣṇa conscious person does not feel the pangs of material miseries; this state of life is called brahma-nirvā ṇ a,
89. Which particular position is called liberation in the Supreme? BG 5.27-28
When one is well situated in devotional service, one comes to the transcendental position, qualiﬁed to feel the presence of the
Lord in the sphere of one’s activity. This particular position is called liberation in the Supreme.
90. How Lord gives instruction to Arjuna as to how one can come to that position by the practice of the mysticism or yoga? BG 5.27-28
the Lord gives instruction to Arjuna as to how one can come to that position by the practice of the mysticism or yoga known as
a ṣṭā ṅ ga-yoga, which is divisible into an eightfold
91. What are the eight folds of yoga? BG 27-28
The eightfold procedure called yama, niyama, āsana, prā ṇ āyāma, pratyāhāra, dhāra ṇ ā, dhyāna and samādhi.
92. Why There is no beneﬁt in closing the eyes altogether? Bg 5.27-28
because then there is every chance of falling asleep.
93. Why there is no beneﬁt in opening the eyes completely? BG 5.27-28
because then there is the hazard of being attracted by sense objects.
94. How can one gain control over the senses by breathing? BG 5.27-28
The breathing movement is restrained within the nostrils by neutralizing the up-moving and down-moving air within the body. By
practice of such yoga one is able to gain control over the senses
95. Who is the proprietor of all planets and the demigods ? BG 5.29
A. Sun god B. Brahma
C. Ishwara D. Lord Krishna 
96. Who is the supreme predominator? BG 5.29
Lord K ṛṣṇ a is the supreme predominator
97. What is transcendental stage, or brahma-nirvā ṇ a? BG 5.29
one who stands fast in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness, controlling the passions, remains factually in the transcendental stage, or brahma-
nirvā ṇ a.
98. What is the highest perfection of life? BG 5.29
Practicing astanga yoga these only preface perfection by devotional service, which alone can award peace to the human being. It
is the highest perfection of life.
