9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita-chapter-14 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/869558 1/12Name: ___________________________________________ Date: ___________________
Bhagavadgita-chapter-14
1. How the living entity is entangled in this material world? BG 14.1
It has also been explained that it is due to association with the modes of nature that
the living entity is entangled in this material world.
2. After acquiring perfect transcendental knowledge wht one will acquire? BG 14.2
After acquiring perfect transcendental knowledge, one acquires qualitative equality
with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, becoming free from the repetition of birth
and death. One does not, however, lose his identity as an individual soul.
3. How the devotees do not lose their individual identities after liberation? BG 14.2
It is understood from Vedic literature that the liberated souls who have reached the
transcendental planets of the spiritual sky always look to the lotus feet of the Supreme
Lord, being engaged in His transcendental loving service. So, even after liberation, the
devotees do not lose their individual identities.
4. What is called transcendental knowledge? BG 14.2
Generally, in the material world, whatever knowledge we get is contaminated by the
three modes of material nature. Knowledge which is not contaminated by the three
modes of nature is called transcendental knowledge.
5. What is called devotional life? BG 14.2
actually, in the spiritual sky, one attains a spiritual form. There are spiritual activities,
and the spiritual situation is called devotional life.
6. What is sometimes called Brahmant ? Bg 14.3
The mahat-tattva is the total cause of the total cosmic manifestation; and that total
substance of the material cause, in which there are three modes of nature, is
sometimes called Brahman.
7. What is the mahat-tattva, is described in vedic literature? BG 14.3
The Supreme Personality impregnates that total substance, and thus innumerable
universes become possible. This total material substance, the mahat-tattva, is
described as Brahman in the Vedic literature
8. Why material nature is not the cause of the birth of the living entities? BG 14.3
The scorpion lays its eggs in piles of rice, and sometimes it is said that the scorpion is
born out of rice. But the rice is not the cause of the scorpion. Actually, the eggs were
laid by the mother. Similarly, material nature is not the cause of the birth of the living
entities.
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita-chapter-14 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/869558 2/129. How The Lord is the cause of all the manifestations of living entities in this material world? BG 14.3
The seed is given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and they only seem to come
out as products of material nature. Thus every living entity, according to his past
activities, has a different body, created by this material nature, so that the entity can
enjoy or suffer according to his past deeds. The Lord is the cause of all the
manifestations of living entities in this material world.
10. Who is the original father of all living entities? BG 14.4
it is clearly explained that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, K ṛṣṇ a, is the original
father of all living entities.
11. The living entities are combinations of? BG 14.4
The living entities are combinations of the material nature and the spiritual nature.
12. Where all the living entities are seen? BG 14.4
living entities are seen not only on this planet but on every planet, even on the highest,
where Brahmā is situated. Everywhere there are living entities; within the earth there
are living entities, even within water and within ﬁre
13. The living entity appearances are due to the? BG 14.4
All these appearances are due to the mother, material nature, and K ṛṣṇ a’s seed-giving
process.
14. How the Living entity created? BG 14.4
the material world is impregnated with living entities, who come out in various forms at
the time of creation according to their past deeds.
15. Why living entity acting under the spell of the three modes of material nature? BG 14.5
The living entity, because he is transcendental, has nothing to do with this material
nature. Still, because he has become conditioned by the material world, he is acting
under the spell of the three modes of material nature.
16. What is the cause of the varieties of happiness and distress? BG 14.5
Because living entities have different kinds of bodies, in terms of the different aspects
of nature, they are induced to act according to that nature. This is the cause of the
varieties of happiness and distress
17. What are causes of the entities’ conditioned status in nature? BG 14.6
The living entities conditioned by material nature are of various types. One is happy,
another is very active, and another is helpless. All these types of psychological
manifestations are causes of the entities’ conditioned status in nature.
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita-chapter-14 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/869558 3/1218. What is the mode of goodness in the material world? BG 14.6
The mode of goodness is ﬁrst considered. The effect of developing the mode of
goodness in the material world is that one becomes wiser than those otherwise
conditioned.
19. Who will have a sense of advancement in material knowledg? BG 14.6
A man in the mode of goodness is not so much affected by material miseries, and he has
a sense of advancement in material knowledge.
20. Why Vedic literature it is said that the mode of goodness means greater knowledge and a greater sense of
happiness? BG 14.6
The representative type is the brāhma ṇ a, who is supposed to be situated in the mode
of goodness. This sense of happiness is due to understanding that, in the mode of
goodness, one is more or less free from sinful reactions. Actually, in the Vedic
literature it is said that the mode of goodness means greater knowledge and a greater
sense of happiness.
21. When The difﬁculty when a living entity is situated in the mode of goodness he becomes conditioned? BG
14.6
The difﬁculty here is that when a living entity is situated in the mode of goodness he
becomes conditioned to feel that he is advanced in knowledge and is better than
others. In this way he becomes conditioned.
22. What is the example for conditioned life? BG 14.6
The best examples are the scientist and the philosopher. Each is very proud of his
knowledge, and because they generally improve their living conditions, they feel a sort
of material happiness. This sense of advanced happiness in conditioned life makes them
bound by the mode of goodness of material nature.
23. Why there will be no likelihood of liberation, or of being transferred to the spiritual world? BG14.6
As such, they are attracted toward working in the mode of goodness, and, as long as
they have an attraction for working in that way, they have to take some type of body in
the modes of nature. Thus there is no likelihood of liberation, or of being transferred to
the spiritual world.
24. Why one thinks that a repeated life of a philosopher, a scientist or a poet is pleasent? BG 14.6
Repeatedly one may become a philosopher, a scientist or a poet, and repeatedly
become entangled in the same disadvantages of birth and death. But, due to the
illusion of the material energy, one thinks that that sort of life is pleasant.
25. What is called the mode of passion? BG 14.7
The mode of passion is characterized by the attraction between man and woman.
Woman has attraction for man, and man has attraction for woman. This is called the
mode of passion.
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita-chapter-14 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/869558 4/1226. What are the products of the mode of passion? BG 14.7
And when the mode of passion is increased, one develops the hankering for material
enjoyment. He wants to enjoy sense gratiﬁcation. For sense gratiﬁcation, a man in the
mode of passion wants some honor in society, or in the nation, and he wants to have a
happy family, with nice children, wife and house. These are the products of the mode
of passion.
27. Why the whole material world is more or less in the mode of passion? BG 14.7
As long as one is hankering after these things, he has to work very hard. Therefore it is
clearly stated here that he becomes associated with the fruits of his activities and thus
becomes bound by such activities. In order to please his wife, children and society and
to keep up his prestige, one has to work. Therefore, the whole material world is more
or less in the mode of passion.
28. What is the advanced condition was considered to be? BG 14.7
Modern civilization is considered to be advanced in the standard of the mode of
passion. Formerly, the advanced condition was considered to be in the mode of
goodness.
29. Why the word tu is very signiﬁcant? BG 14.8
the speciﬁc application of the word tu is very signiﬁcant. This means that the mode of
ignorance is a very peculiar qualiﬁcation of the embodied soul. The mode of ignorance
is just the opposite of the mode of goodness.
30. What is the difference between the mode of goodness and the mode of ignorance? BG 14.8
the mode of goodness, by development of knowledge, one can understand what is
what, but the mode of ignorance is just the opposite. Everyone under the spell of the
mode of ignorance becomes mad, and a madman cannot understand what is what.
Instead of making advancement, one becomes degraded.
31. What is madness? BG 14.8
everyone can see that his grandfather has died and therefore he will also die; man is
mortal. The children that he conceives will also die. So death is sure. Still, people are
madly accumulating money and working very hard all day and night, not caring for the
eternal spirit. This is madness.
32. What kind of people are very lazy? BG 14.8
In their madness, they are very reluctant to make advancement in spiritual
understanding. Such people are very lazy.
33. How the mode of ignorance people will be? BG 14.8
When they are invited to associate for spiritual understanding, they are not much
interested. They are not even active like the man who is controlled by the mode of
passion. Thus another symptom of one embedded in the mode of ignorance is that he
sleeps more than is required.
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita-chapter-14 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/869558 5/1234. What are the symptoms of a person conditioned by the mode of ignorance? BG 14.8
the mode of ignorance is that he sleeps more than is required. Six hours of sleep is
sufﬁcient, but a man in the mode of ignorance sleeps at least ten or twelve hours a
day. Such a man appears to be always dejected and is addicted to intoxicants and
sleeping. These are the symptoms of a person conditioned by the mode of ignorance.
35. What are signs of one in the mode of passion? BG 14.9
A man in the mode of passion may be engaged in fruitive activity; he owns as much as
he can and spends for good causes. Sometimes he tries to open hospitals, give to
charity institutions, etc. These are signs of one in the mode of passion.
36. What in mode of ignorance a person do? BG 14.9
the mode of ignorance covers knowledge. In the mode of ignorance, whatever one does
is good neither for him nor for anyone.
37. What is the competition is always going on? BG 14.10
When the mode of passion is prominent, the modes of goodness and ignorance are
defeated. When the mode of goodness is prominent, passion and ignorance are
defeated. And when the mode of ignorance is prominent, passion and goodness are
defeated. This competition is always going on.
38. How one can develop three modes of material nature? BG 14.10
if one wants, he can develop, by practice, the mode of goodness and thus defeat the
modes of ignorance and passion. One can similarly develop the mode of passion and
defeat goodness and ignorance. Or one can develop the mode of ignorance and defeat
goodness and passion
39. What is called vasudeva state? BG 14.10
if one is determined he can be blessed by the mode of goodness, and by transcending
the mode of goodness he can be situated in pure goodness, which is called the vasudeva
state,
40. How it can be understood in what mode of nature one is situated? BG 14.10
the vasudeva state, a state in which one can understand the science of God. By the
manifestation of particular activities, it can be understood in what mode of nature one
is situated.
41. How many gates are in the body what are they? BG 14.11
There are nine gates in the body: two eyes, two ears, two nostrils, the mouth, the
genitals and the anus.
42. How to understand that one has developed the mode of goodness? BG 14.11
When every gate is illuminated by the symptoms of goodness, it should be understood
that one has developed the mode of goodness.
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita-chapter-14 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/869558 6/1243. What is the position of goodness? BG 14.11
In the mode of goodness, one can see things in the right position, one can hear things in
the right position, and one can taste things in the right position. One becomes cleansed
inside and outside. In every gate there is development of the symptoms of happiness,
and that is the position of goodness.
44. Is there any end to sense gratiﬁcation in the mode of passion? BG 14.12
No. One in the mode of passion is never satisﬁed with the position he has already
acquired; he hankers to increase his position. If he wants to construct a residential
house, he tries his best to have a palatial house, as if he would be able to reside in that
house eternally. And he develops a great hankering for sense gratiﬁcation. There is no
end to sense gratiﬁcation.
45. What are the characteristic of the mode of passion? BG 14.12
There is no end to sense gratiﬁcation. He always wants to remain with his family and in
his house and to continue the process of sense gratiﬁcation. There is no cessation of
this. All these symptoms should be understood as characteristic of the mode of passion.
46. When knowledge is absent? BG 14.13
When there is no illumination, knowledge is absent
47. How a person in the mode of ignorance does? BG 14.13
One in the mode of ignorance does not work by a regulative principle; he wants to act
whimsically, for no purpose
48. What is called illution? BG 14.13
A person in the mode of ignorance Even though he has the capacity to work, he makes
no endeavor. This is called illusion.
49. What are the symptoms of one in the mode of ignorance? BG 14.13
Although consciousness is going on, life is inactive. These are the symptoms of one in
the mode of ignorance.
50. Who will enjoys godly happiness? BG 14.14
One in goodness attains higher planetary systems, like Brahmaloka or Janaloka, and
there enjoys godly happiness
51. Why the word amalān is signiﬁcant? BG 14.14
it means “free from the modes of passion and ignorance.
52. What is the purest form of existence in the material world? BG 14.14
There are impurities in the material world, but the mode of goodness is the purest form
of existence in the material world.
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita-chapter-14 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/869558 7/1253. Who will be elevated to the planets where great sages and great devotees live? BG 14.14
Those who die in the mode of goodness are elevated to the planets where great sages
and great devotees live.
54. What is incorrect? BG 14.15
Some people have the impression that when the soul reaches the platform of human life
it never goes down again. This is incorrect.
55. What will happen to the mode of ignorance person dies? BG 14.15
if one develops the mode of ignorance, after his death he is degraded to an animal form
of life.
56. How one can elivate himself from animal form of life to the human form of life? BG 14.15
From animal form of life one has to again elevate himself, by an evolutionary process,
to come again to the human form of life.
57. those who are actually serious about human life what they should do? BG 14.15
those who are actually serious about human life should take to the mode of goodness
and in good association transcend the modes and become situated in K ṛṣṇ a
consciousness.
58. How the human being will again attain to the human status? BG 14.15
in good association transcend the modes and become situated in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness.
This is the aim of human life. Otherwise, there is no guarantee that the human being
will again attain to the human status.
59. What mode of goodness is pure? BG 14.16
The result of pious activities in the mode of goodness is pure.
60. Who are situated in happiness? BG 14.16
the sages, who are free from all illusion, are situated in happiness.
61. What is miserable? BG 14.16
activities in the mode of passion are simply miserable
62. Why Any activity for material happiness is bound to be defeated? BG 14.16
Any activity for material happiness is bound to be defeated. If, for example, one wants
to have a skyscraper, so much human misery has to be undergone before a big
skyscraper can be built.
63. To build big skyscraper what the financial has to do? BG 14.16
The ﬁnancier has to take much trouble to earn a mass of wealth, and those who are
slaving to construct the building have to render physical toil. The miseries are there.
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita-chapter-14 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/869558 8/1264. What Bhagavad-gītā says about mode of passion? BG 14.16
Thus Bhagavad-gītā says that in any activity performed under the spell of the mode of
passion, there is deﬁnitely great misery.
65. What is not actual happiness? BG 14.16
There may be a little so-called mental happiness – “I have this house or this money” –
but this is not actual happiness.
66. How the mode of ignorance person go on toward animal life? BG 14.16
As far as the mode of ignorance is concerned, the performer is without knowledge, and
therefore all his activities result in present misery, and afterwards he will go on toward
animal life. Animal life is always miserable,
67. What is the law of nature? BG 14.16
under the spell of the illusory energy, māyā, the animals do not understand this.
Slaughtering poor animals is also due to the mode of ignorance. The animal killers do
not know that in the future the animal will have a body suitable to kill them. That is
the law of nature.
68. How supreme lord does not tolerate even an ant’s being killed? BG 14.16
In human society, if one kills a man he has to be hanged. That is the law of the state.
Because of ignorance, people do not perceive that there is a complete state controlled
by the Supreme Lord. Every living creature is a son of the Supreme Lord, and He does
not tolerate even an ant’s being killed.
69. If one indulges in meat-eating what it is to be understood? BG 14.16
A human being has no need to kill animals, because God has supplied so many nice
things. If one indulges in meat-eating anyway, it is to be understood that he is acting in
ignorance and is making his future very dark.
70. Of all kinds of animal killing what is most vicious? BG 14.16
Of all kinds of animal killing, the killing of cows is most vicious because the cow gives
us all kinds of pleasure by supplying milk. Cow slaughter is an act of the grossest type
of ignorance.
71. What is the advancement of civilization. In modern human society? BG 14.16
Brāhma ṇ as are the symbol of spiritual education, and cows are the symbol of the most
valuable food; these two living creatures, the brāhma ṇ as and the cows, must be given
all protection – that is real advancement of civilization. In modern human society
72. When it is to be understand that human society is advancing in the wrong direction? BG 14.16
When spiritual knowledge is neglected, and cow killing is encouraged. It is to be
understood, then, that human society is advancing in the wrong direction and is
clearing the path to its own condemnation.
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita-chapter-14 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/869558 9/1273. What is certainly not a human civilization? BG 14.16
A civilization which guides the citizens to become animals in their next lives is certainly
not a human civilization.
74. Why Modern age is a very dangerous age? BG 14.16
The present human civilization is, of course, grossly misled by the modes of passion and
ignorance. It is a very dangerous age,
75. What to do to save humanity from the greatest danger? BG 14.16
all nations should take care to provide the easiest process, K ṛṣṇ a consciousness, to save
humanity from the greatest danger
76. Why K ṛṣṇ a consciousness is recommended in modern age? BG 14.17
Since the present civilization is not very congenial to the living entities, K ṛṣṇ a
consciousness is recommended. Through K ṛṣṇ a consciousness, society will develop the
mode of goodness.
77. How the things can be seen in mode of goodness and mode of ignorance? BG 14.17
When the mode of goodness is developed, people will see things as they are. In the
mode of ignorance, people are just like animals and cannot see things clearly.
78. What people will do when they have no education in actual knowledge? BG 14.17
they do not see that by killing one animal they are taking the chance of being killed by
the same animal in the next life. Because people have no education in actual
knowledge, they become irresponsible
79. When people will be happy and prosperous? BG 14.17
no education in actual knowledge, they become irresponsible. To stop this
irresponsibility, education for developing the mode of goodness of the people in general
must be there. When they are actually educated in the mode of goodness, they will
become sober, in full knowledge of things as they are. Then people will be happy and
prosperous.
80. When is the possibility for peace and prosperity all over the world? BG 14.17
Even if the majority of the people aren’t happy and prosperous, if a certain percentage
of the population develops K ṛṣṇ a consciousness and becomes situated in the mode of
goodness, then there is the possibility for peace and prosperity all over the world.
81. When there is neither happiness nor peace of mind? BG 14.17
if the world is devoted to the modes of passion and ignorance, there can be no peace or
prosperity. In the mode of passion, people become greedy, and their hankering for
sense enjoyment has no limit. One can see that even if one has enough money and
adequate arrangements for sense gratiﬁcation, there is neither happiness nor peace of
mind.
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita-chapter-14 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/869558 10/1282. How one can get happiness? BG 14.17
If one wants happiness at all, his money will not help him; he has to elevate himself to
the mode of goodness by practicing K ṛṣṇ a consciousness.
83. What are all miserable in the mode of passion? BG 14.17
When one is engaged in the mode of passion, not only is he mentally unhappy, but his
profession and occupation are also very troublesome. He has to devise so many plans
and schemes to acquire enough money to maintain his status quo. This is all miserable.
84. Who will have Their future in life is very dark? BG 14.17
In the mode of ignorance, people become mad. Being distressed by their circumstances,
they take shelter of intoxication, and thus they sink further into ignorance. Their future
in life is very dark.
85. Which is an upper planetary system? BG 14.18
There is an upper planetary system, consisting of the heavenly planets, where everyone
is highly elevated. According to the degree of development of the mode of goodness,
the living entity can be transferred to various planets in this system. The highest planet
is Satyaloka, or Brahmaloka
86. Who is the prime person of this universe where does he resides? BG 14.18
Lord Brahmā in Brahmaloka
87. How the The mode of passion person take birth as? BG 14.18
The mode of passion is mixed. It is in the middle, between the modes of goodness and
ignorance. A person is not always pure, but even if he should be purely in the mode of
passion, he will simply remain on this earth as a king or a rich man.
88. How the word of Ignorance person take birth as? BG 14.18
The lowest quality, the mode of ignorance, is described here as abominable. The result
of developing ignorance is very, very risky. It is the lowest quality in material nature.
Beneath the human level there are eight million species of life – birds, beasts, reptiles,
trees, etc.
89. Why the word tāmasā ḥ is very signiﬁcant here? BG 14.18
The word tāmasā ḥ is very signiﬁcant here. Tāmasā ḥ indicates those who stay
continuously in the mode of ignorance without rising to a higher mode. Their future is
very dark.
90. What is an opportunity for men in the modes of ignorance and passion to be elevated to the mode of
goodness? BG 14.18
There is an opportunity for men in the modes of ignorance and passion to be elevated
to the mode of goodness, and that system is called K ṛṣṇ a consciousness. But one who
does not take advantage of this opportunity will certainly continue in the lower modes.
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita-chapter-14 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/869558 11/1291. How One can transcend all the activities of the modes of material nature? BG 14.19
One can transcend all the activities of the modes of material nature simply by
understanding them properly by learning from the proper souls. The real spiritual
master is K ṛṣṇ a, and He is imparting this spiritual knowledge to Arjuna.
92. Why the living entity is not the performer of different activities ? BG 14.19
Actually, the living entity is not the performer of different activities. He is forced to
act because he is situated in a particular type of body, conducted by some particular
mode of material nature.
93. How one can see his real position? BG 14.19
Unless one has the help of spiritual authority, he cannot understand in what position he
is actually situated. With the association of a bona ﬁde spiritual master, he can see his
real position,
94. What is the word dehī means? BG 14.20
embodied Although one is within this material body, by his advancement in spiritual
knowledge he can be free from the inﬂuence of the modes of nature
95. How one can enjoy the happiness of spiritual life even in this body? BG 14.20
because, after leaving this body, he is certainly going to the spiritual sky. But even in
this body he can enjoy spiritual happiness. In other words, devotional service in K ṛṣṇ a
consciousness is the sign of liberation from material entanglement,
96. What is the sign of liberation from material entanglement? BG 14.20
When one is freed from the inﬂuence of the modes of material nature, he enters into
devotional service. In other words, devotional service in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness is the sign
of liberation from material entanglement
97. Arjuna inquires of the means by which he can attain the transcendental nature? BG 14.21
That is very important. Unless one knows the direct means by which one can be
situated always transcendentally, there is no possibility of showing the symptoms.
98. How can a person understand that he is under the control of one of the three modes of material nature? BG
14.22-25
Arjuna submitted three different questions, and the Lord answers them one after
another. In these verses, K ṛṣṇ a ﬁrst indicates that a person transcendentally situated
has no envy and does not hanker for anything. When a living entity stays in this material
world embodied by the material body, it is to be understood that he is under the
control of one of the three modes of material nature.
99. How material body will automatically be forgotten? BG 14.22-25
When he is actually out of the body, then he is out of the clutches of the material
modes of nature. But as long as he is not out of the material body, he should be
neutral. He should engage himself in the devotional service of the Lord so that his
identity with the material body will automatically be forgotten.
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita-chapter-14 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/869558 12/12100. How sense gratiﬁcation automatically stops? BG 14.22-25
When one is conscious of the material body, he acts only for sense gratiﬁcation, but
when one transfers the consciousness to K ṛṣṇ a, sense gratiﬁcation automatically stops.
101. Arjuna`s concerns the dealings of a transcendentally situated person? BG 14.22-25
The materially situated person is affected by so-called honor and dishonor offered to
the body, but the transcendentally situated person is not affected by such false honor
and dishonor. He performs his duty in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness and does not mind whether a
man honors or dishonors him
102. How transcendentally situated person act in krishna consciousness? BG 14.22-25
he does not hate his so-called enemy. He is equally disposed and sees everything on an
equal level because he knows perfectly well that he has nothing to do with material
existence. Social and political issues do not affect him, because he knows the situation
of temporary upheavals and disturbances.
103. Why a transcidentally situated person does not attempt anything for his own sake? BG 14.22-25
He can attempt anything for K ṛṣṇ a, but for his personal self he does not attempt
anything. By such behavior one becomes actually transcendentally situated.
104. What is the means of attaining to the transcendental position? BG 14.26
One should not be disturbed by the activities of the modes of nature; instead of putting
his consciousness into such activities, he may transfer his consciousness to K ṛṣṇ a
activities. K ṛṣṇ a activities are known as bhakti-yoga – always acting for K ṛṣṇ a. This
includes not only K ṛṣṇ a, but His different plenary expansions such as Rāma and
Nārāya ṇ a. He has innumerable expansions. One who is engaged in the service of any of
the forms of K ṛṣṇ a, or of His plenary expansions, is considered to be transcendentally
situated.
105. What Lord says about his nature? BG 14.26
The Lord says that His nature is eternal, blissful and full of knowledge, and the living
entities are part and parcel of the Supreme, as gold particles are part of a gold mine.
Thus the living entity, in his spiritual position, is as good as gold, as good as K ṛṣṇ a in
quality. The difference of individuality continues, otherwise there would be no question
of bhakti-yoga.
106. What is Bhakti yoga means? BG 14.26
Bhakti-yoga means that the Lord is there, the devotee is there, and the activity of
exchange of love between the Lord and the devotee is there. Therefore the
individuality of two persons is present in the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the
individual person, otherwise there would be no meaning to bhakti-yoga.
107. How One can attain the Supreme Brahman ? BG 14.26
One can attain the Supreme Brahman by becoming Brahman. This means that one must
qualitatively become one with Brahman. By attainment of Brahman, one does not lose
his eternal Brahman identity as an individual soul.
