9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-12 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/861942 1/12Name: ___________________________________________ Date: ___________________
Bhagavad-gita chapter-12
1. What Lord Krishna explained to Arjuna in the begining of 12th Chapter? BG 12.1
K ṛṣṇa has now explained about the personal, the impersonal and the universal and has
described all kinds of devotees and yogīs.
2. transcendentalists can be divided in to how many classes? name them? BG 12.1
Generally, the transcendentalists can be divided into two classes. One is the
impersonalist, and the other is the personalist.
3. What the personalist devotee engages himself in ? BG 12.1
The personalist devotee engages himself with all energy in the service of the Supreme
Lord.
4. What the impersonalist engage himself in? BG 12.1
The impersonalist also engages himself, not directly in the service of K ṛṣṇ a but in
meditation on the impersonal Brahman, the unmanifested.
5. Arjuna is here questioning Lord Krishna which position is better? BG 12.1
There are different ways to realize the Absolute Truth, but K ṛṣṇ a indicates in this
chapter that bhakti-yoga, or devotional service to Him, is the highest of all. It is the
most direct, and it is the easiest means for association with the Godhead.
6. What answer Lord Krishna gives to Arjuna regarding Yoga? BG 12.2
K ṛṣṇa clearly says that he who concentrates upon His personal form and who worships
Him with faith and devotion is to be considered most perfect in yoga.
7. How a pure devotee does everything for K ṛṣṇ a? BG 12.2
For one in such K ṛṣṇ a consciousness there are no material activities, because
everything is done for K ṛṣṇ a.
8. What is action is in full samādhi? BG 12.2
A pure devotee is constantly engaged. Sometimes he chants, sometimes he hears or
reads books about K ṛṣṇ a, or sometimes he cooks prasādam or goes to the marketplace
to purchase something for K ṛṣṇ a, or sometimes he washes the temple or the dishes –
whatever he does, he does not let a single moment pass without devoting his activities
to K ṛṣṇ a. Such action is in full samādhi.
9. Those who do not directly worship the Supreme Godhead, K ṛṣṇ a still how they achieve the goal? BG 12.3-4
Those who do not directly worship the Supreme Godhead, K ṛṣṇ a, but who attempt to
achieve the same goal by an indirect process, also ultimately achieve the same goal, Śrī
K ṛṣṇa.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-12 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/861942 2/1210. Who will know that Vāsudeva is all? BG 12.3-4
After many births the man of wisdom seeks refuge in Me, knowing that Vāsudeva is all.
11. Who will surrenders unto Lord K ṛṣṇ a? BG 12.3-4
When a person comes to full knowledge after many births, he surrenders unto Lord
K ṛṣṇa.
12. How one approaches the Godhead? Bg 12.3-4
If one approaches the Godhead by the method mentioned in this verse, he has to
control the senses, render service to everyone and engage in the welfare of all beings.
13. Why It is inferred that one has to approach Lord K ṛṣṇ a? Bg 12.3-4
It is inferred that one has to approach Lord K ṛṣṇ a, otherwise there is no perfect
realization.
14. What is involved before one fully surrenders unto Lord Krishna? Bg 12.3-4
Often there is much penance involved before one fully surrenders unto Him.
15. In order to perceive the Supersoul within the individual soul what one should do? BG 12.3-4
In order to perceive the Supersoul within the individual soul, one has to cease the
sensual activities of seeing, hearing, tasting, working, etc.
16. How one understand that the Supreme Soul is present everywhere? Bg 12.3-4
one has to cease the sensual activities of seeing, hearing, tasting, working, etc. Then
one comes to understand that the Supreme Soul is present everywhere.
17. Who will sees soul only? BG 12.3-4
one comes to understand that the Supreme Soul is present everywhere. Realizing this,
one envies no living entity – he sees no difference between man and animal because he
sees soul only
18. Whom the method of impersonal realization is very difﬁcult? BG 12.3-4
Realizingb the Supreme Soul is present everywhere he sees no difference between man
and animal because he sees soul only, not the outer covering. But for the common man,
this method of impersonal realization is very difﬁcult.
19. Who are called jñāna-yogīs? BG 12.5
The group of transcendentalists who follow the path of the inconceivable,
unmanifested, impersonal feature of the Supreme Lord are called jñāna-yogīs
20. Who are called bhakti-yogīs? BG 12.5
persons who are in full K ṛṣṇ a consciousness, engaged in devotional service to the Lord,
are called bhakti-yogīs.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-12 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/861942 3/1221. What is the difference between jñāna-yoga and bhakti-yoga? BG 12.5
The process of jñāna-yoga, although ultimately bringing one to the same goal, is very
troublesome, whereas the path of bhakti-yoga, the process of being in direct service to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is easier and is natural for the embodied soul.
22. Why it is very difﬁcult for individual sould to understand theory? BG 12.5
The individual soul is embodied since time immemorial. It is very difﬁcult for him to
simply theoretically understand that he is not the body.
23. Why the bhakti-yogī accepts the Deity of K ṛṣṇ a as worshipable? BG 12.5
because there is some bodily conception ﬁxed in the mind, which can thus be applied.
Of course, worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His form within the
temple is not idol worship.
24. What is the evidence in the Vedic literature that worship ? BG 12.5
There is evidence in the Vedic literature that worship may be sagu ṇ a or nirgu ṇ a – of the
Supreme possessing or not possessing attributes.
25. What is sagu ṇ a form of worship? BG 12.5
Worship of the Deity in the temple is sagu ṇ a worship,
26. What is the absolute nature of the Supreme Lord? BG 12.5
for the Lord is represented by material qualities. But the form of the Lord, though
represented by material qualities such as stone, wood or oil paint, is not actually
material. That is the absolute nature of the Supreme Lord.
27. What is called arcā-vigraha? BG 12.5
God has an authorized representation in the Deity form, which is called arcā-vigraha.
28. How Lord accept the services of the devotee? BG 12.5
arcā-vigraha is an incarnation of the Supreme Lord. God will accept service through
that form. The Lord is omnipotent, all-powerful; therefore, by His incarnation as arcā-
vigraha He can accept the services of the devotee, just to make it convenient for the
man in conditioned life.
29. Who should refer Vedic literatures as the Upani ṣ ads? BG 12.5
for those who are following the impersonal way to spiritual realization the path is
difﬁcult. They have to understand the unmanifested representation of the Supreme
through such Vedic literatures as the Upani ṣ ads,
30. What kind of difficulty they face learning Upani ṣ ads? BG 12.5
they have to learn the language, understand the nonperceptual feelings, and realize all
these processes. This is not very easy for a common man.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-12 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/861942 4/1231. Who will render service to māyā? BG 12.6-7
In pure devotional service one comes to the realization that God is great and that the
individual soul is subordinate to Him. His duty is to render service to the Lord – and if
he does not, then he will render service to māyā.
32. Why one should be fully devoted? BG 12.6-7
As stated before, the Supreme Lord can be appreciated only by devotional service.
Therefore, one should be fully devoted.
33. What is the standard of devotional service? BG 12.6-7
One should ﬁx his mind fully on K ṛṣṇ a in order to achieve Him. One should work only for
K ṛṣṇa. It does not matter in what kind of work one engages, but that work should be
done only for K ṛṣṇ a. That is the standard of devotional service.
34. Who can sacriﬁce everything for K ṛṣṇ a’s satisfaction? BG 12.6-7
The devotee does not desire any achievement other than pleasing the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. His life’s mission is to please K ṛṣṇ a, and he can sacriﬁce
everything for K ṛṣṇ a’s satisfaction,
35. What attracts the devotee to the Personality of Godhead? BG 12.6-7
just as Arjuna did in the Battle of Kuruk ṣ etra. The process is very simple: one can
devote himself in his occupation and engage at the same time in chanting Hare K ṛṣṇ a,
Hare K ṛṣṇ a, K ṛṣṇ a K ṛṣṇ a, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.
Such transcendental chanting attracts the devotee to the Personality of Godhead.
36. What Supreme Lord promises? BG 12.6-7
The Supreme Lord herein promises that without delay He will deliver a pure devotee
thus engaged from the ocean of material existence.
37. Those who are advanced in yoga practice what they can do? BG 12.6-7
Those who are advanced in yoga practice can willfully transfer the soul to whatever
planet they like by the yoga process, and others take the opportunity in various ways
38. What devotee has to do to transfer himself to the spiritual sky? BG 12.6-7
as far as the devotee is concerned, it is clearly stated here that the Lord Himself takes
him. The devotee does not need to wait to become very experienced in order to
transfer himself to the spiritual sky.
39. What a devotee does not need to practice ? BG 12.6-7
The purport of this verse is that a devotee does not need to practice a ṣṭ ā ṅ ga-yoga in
order to transfer his soul to the spiritual planets.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-12 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/861942 5/1240. How Lord delivers the devotee from material existence? BG 12.6-7
Lord himself become deliverar becomes the deliverer. A child is completely cared for
by his parents, and thus his position is secure. Similarly, a devotee does not need to
endeavor to transfer himself by yoga practice to other planets. Rather, the Supreme
Lord, by His great mercy, comes at once, riding on His bird carrier Garu ḍ a, and at once
delivers the devotee from material existence.
41. Who should always prefer the process of devotional service to all other paths? BG 12.6-7
One simply has to practice the easy process of K ṛṣṇ a consciousness and fully engage
himself in devotional service. Any intelligent man should always prefer the process of
devotional service to all other paths.
42. What is the speciﬁc benediction of devotional service? BG 12.6-7
One who is devoted to the Supreme Personality can attain all the beneﬁts derived from
other yogic processes, speculation, rituals, sacriﬁces, charities, etc. That is the speciﬁc
benediction of devotional service.
43. What is the highest perfection of life? BG 12.6-7
There is no need for one to consider the sinful actions of his past life, because the
Supreme Lord fully takes charge of him. Therefore one should not futilely try to deliver
himself in spiritual realization. Let everyone take shelter of the supreme omnipotent
Godhead, K ṛṣṇ a. That is the highest perfection of life.
44. One who is engaged in Lord K ṛṣṇ a’s devotional service how his life will be from the begining? BG 12.8
One who is engaged in Lord K ṛṣṇ a’s devotional service lives in a direct relationship with
the Supreme Lord, so there is no doubt that his position is transcendental from the very
beginning.
45. How a devotee lives in K ṛṣṇ a? BG 12.8
A devotee does not live on the material plane – he lives in K ṛṣṇ a.
46. How Lord internal potency are dancing on the tongue of the devotee? BG 12.8
The holy name of the Lord and the Lord are nondifferent; therefore when a devotee
chants Hare K ṛṣṇ a, K ṛṣṇ a and His internal potency are dancing on the tongue of the
devotee.
47. How a devotee becomes K ṛṣṇ a-ized by eating the remnants? BG 12.8
When devotee offers K ṛṣṇ a food, K ṛṣṇ a directly accepts these eatables, and the
devotee becomes K ṛṣṇ a-ized by eating the remnants.
48. What is the first processes of bhakti-yoga? BG 12.9
The ﬁrst applies to one who has actually developed an attachment for K ṛṣṇ a, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, by transcendental love.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-12 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/861942 6/1249. What is the second process of Bhakti yoga? BG 12.9
the other is for one who has not developed an attachment for the Supreme Person by
transcendental love. For this second class there are different prescribed rules and
regulations one can follow to be ultimately elevated to the stage of attachment to
K ṛṣṇa.
50. in material existence how senses can be pured? BG 12.9
Bhakti-yoga is the puriﬁcation of the senses. At the present moment in material
existence the senses are always impure, being engaged in sense gratiﬁcation. But by
the practice of bhakti-yoga these senses can become puriﬁed, and in the puriﬁed state
they come directly in contact with the Supreme Lord. In this material existence,
51. What is this the whole processe ? BG 12.9
This love of God is now in a dormant state in everyone’s heart. And, there, love of God
is manifested in different ways, but it is contaminated by material association. Now the
heart has to be puriﬁed of the material association, and that dormant, natural love for
K ṛṣṇa has to be revived. That is the whole process.
52. To practice the regulative principles of bhakti-yoga what one should do? BG 12.9
one should, under the guidance of an expert spiritual master, follow certain principles
53. What are the principles of bhakti-yoga? BG 12.9
one should rise early in the morning, take bath, enter the temple and offer prayers and
chant Hare K ṛṣṇ a, then collect ﬂowers to offer to the Deity, cook foodstuffs to offer to
the Deity, take prasādam, and so on. There are various rules and regulations which one
should follow. And one should constantly hear Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
from pure devotees.
54. How one will surely bring one to the stage of love of God? BG 12.9
This practice of bhakti-yoga, under the rules and regulations, with the direction of a
spiritual master, will surely bring one to the stage of love of God.
55. if one is not able even to practice the regulative principles of bhakti-yoga what he should do? BG 12.10
One who is not able even to practice the regulative principles of bhakti-yoga, under the
guidance of a spiritual master, can still be drawn to this perfectional stage by working
for the Supreme Lord.
56. How one can be performed for the satisfaction of K ṛṣṇ a? BG 12.10
If one has sufﬁcient money, he can help in building an ofﬁce or temple for propagating
K ṛṣṇa consciousness. Or he can help with publications. There are various ﬁelds of
activity, and one should be interested in such activities. If one cannot sacriﬁce the
results of his activities, the same person can still sacriﬁce some percentage to
propagate K ṛṣṇ a consciousness.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-12 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/861942 7/1257. How voluntary service to the cause of K ṛṣṇ a consciousness will help one to rise to a higher state ? BG 12.10
If one cannot sacriﬁce the results of his activities, the same person can still sacriﬁce
some percentage to propagate K ṛṣṇ a consciousness. This voluntary service to the cause
of K ṛṣṇ a consciousness will help one to rise to a higher state of love for God,
whereupon one becomes perfect.
58. If one attaches himself directly to the activities of K ṛṣṇ a consciousness and he has problem from family or
other problem what he should do? BG 12.11
For one who has such a problem, it is advised that he sacriﬁce the accumulated result
of his activities to some good cause. Such procedures are described in the Vedic rules.
59. How one can sacriﬁce the accumulated result of his activities to some good cause? BG 12.11
There are many descriptions of sacriﬁces and special functions for the full-moon day,
and there is special work in which the result of one’s previous action may be applied.
Thus one may gradually become elevated to the state of knowledge.
60. How by the practice of giving up the fruits of one’s activities one is sure to purify his mind gradually? BG
12.11
It is also found that when one who is not even interested in the activities of K ṛṣṇ a
consciousness gives charity to some hospital or some other social institution, he gives
up the hard-earned results of his activities. That is also recommended here because by
the practice of giving up the fruits of one’s activities one is sure to purify his mind
gradually, and in that puriﬁed stage of mind one becomes able to understand K ṛṣṇ a
consciousness.
61. Is K ṛṣṇ a consciousness is dependent on any other experience? BG 12.11
K ṛṣṇa consciousness is not dependent on any other experience, because K ṛṣṇ a
consciousness itself can purify one’s mind, but if there are impediments to accepting
K ṛṣṇa consciousness, one may try to give up the results of his actions.
62. How one may try to give up the results of his actions? BG 12.11
In that respect, social service, community service, national service, sacriﬁce for one’s
country, etc., may be accepted so that some day one may come to the stage of pure
devotional service to the Supreme Lord.
63. yata ḥ prav ṛ ttir bhūtānām what is the meaning of this verse? BG 12.11
if one decides to sacriﬁce for the supreme cause, even if he does not know that the
supreme cause is K ṛṣṇ a, he will come gradually to understand that K ṛṣṇ a is the
supreme cause by the sacriﬁcial method.
64. How many kinds of devotional service are their and what are they? BG 12.12
there are two kinds of devotional service: the way of regulative principles and the way
of full attachment in love to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-12 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/861942 8/1265. by knowledge how one can be able to understand Lord? BG 12.12
For those who are actually not able to follow the principles of K ṛṣṇ a consciousness it is
better to cultivate knowledge, because by knowledge one can be able to understand his
real position.
66. What sort of meditation is preferred if one is unable to engage in devotional service? BG 12.12
In the cultivation of knowledge there are processes which make one understand that
one himself is the Supreme, and that sort of meditation is preferred if one is unable to
engage in devotional service. If one is not able to meditate in such a way, then there
are prescribed duties, as enjoined in the Vedic literature,
67. How By meditation one can be able to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead? BG 12.12
Gradually knowledge will develop to the point of meditation. By meditation one can be
able to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead by a gradual process.
68. Who all should employ the result of karma for some good cause? BG 12.12
for the brāhma ṇ as, k ṣ atriyas, vaiśyas and śūdras, which we shall ﬁnd in the last chapter
of Bhagavad-gītā. But in all cases, one should give up the result or fruits of labor; this
means to employ the result of karma for some good cause.
69. In summary, to reach the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the highest goal how many process are there? BG
12.12
there are two processes: one process is by gradual development, and the other process
is direct.
70. Which process is direct? BG 12.12
Devotional service in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness is the direct method,
71. Which process is gradual development? BG 12.12
the other method involves renouncing the fruits of one’s activities. Then one can come
to the stage of knowledge, then to the stage of meditation, then to the stage of
understanding the Supersoul, and then to the stage of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. One may take either the step-by-step process or the direct path.
72. Why the indirect process is not recommended for Arjuna? BG 12.12
because he is already at the stage of loving devotional service to the Supreme Lord. It
is for others, who are not at this stage; for them the gradual process of renunciation,
knowledge, meditation and realization of the Supersoul and Brahman should be
followed.
73. as far as Bhagavad-gītā is concerned,why it is the direct method that is stressed? BG 12.12
Everyone is advised to take to the direct method and surrender unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, K ṛṣṇ a.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-12 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/861942 9/1274. What is the transcendental qualiﬁcations of a pure devotee? BG 12.13-14
A pure devotee is never disturbed in any circumstances. Nor is he envious of anyone.
Nor does a devotee become his enemy’s enemy
75. What he thinks if a person becomes his enemy? BG 12.13-14
he thinks, “This person is acting as my enemy due to my own past misdeeds. So it is
better to suffer than to protest.
76. Whenever a devotee is in distress or has fallen into difﬁculty what he thinks? Bg 12.13-14
he thinks that it is the Lord’s mercy upon him. He thinks, “Thanks to my past misdeeds I
should suffer far, far greater than I am suffering now. So it is by the mercy of the
Supreme Lord that I am not getting all the punishment I am due. I am just getting a
little, by the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
77. What pure devotee thinks that by the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead? BG 12.13-14
he is always calm, quiet and patient, despite many distressful conditions. A devotee is
also always kind to everyone, even to his enemy
78. What is Nirmama means? BG 12.13-14
Nirmama means that a devotee does not attach much importance to the pains and
trouble pertaining to the body because he knows perfectly well that he is not the
material body
79. Why a pure devotee does not identify with the body? BG 12.13-14
He does not identify with the body; therefore he is freed from the conception of false
ego and is equipoised in happiness and distress. He is tolerant, and he is satisﬁed with
whatever comes by the grace of the Supreme Lord. He does not endeavor much to
achieve something with great difﬁculty
80. How a pure devotee is always joyful? BG 12.13-14
he is always joyful. He is a completely perfect mystic because he is ﬁxed in the
instructions received from the spiritual master, and because his senses are controlled
he is determined.
81. How a pure devotee is not swayed by false arguments? BG 12.13-14
because no one can lead him from the ﬁxed determination of devotional service. He is
fully conscious that K ṛṣṇ a is the eternal Lord, so no one can disturb him. All these
qualiﬁcations enable him to ﬁx his mind and intelligence entirely on the Supreme Lord
82. Why the Lord says that such a devotee is very dear to Him? BG 12.13-14
Such a standard of devotional service is undoubtedly very rare, but a devotee becomes
situated in that stage by following the regulative principles of devotional service.
Furthermore, the Lord says that such a devotee is very dear to Him, for the Lord is
always pleased with all his activities in full K ṛṣṇ a consciousness.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-12 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/861942 10/1283. What are the more qualiﬁcations are further being described by Lord
No one is put into difﬁculty, anxiety, fearfulness or dissatisfaction by such a devotee.
Since a devotee is kind to everyone, he does not act in such a way as to put others into
anxiety.
84. if others try to put a devotee into anxiety? BG 12.15
he is not disturbed. It is by the grace of the Lord that he is so practiced that he is not
disturbed by any outward disturbance. Actually because a devotee is always engrossed
in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness and engaged in devotional service, such material circumstances
cannot move him
85. When a materialistic person becomes very happy ? BG 12.15
Generally a materialistic person becomes very happy when there is something for his
sense gratiﬁcation and his body, but when he sees that others have something for their
sense gratiﬁcation and he hasn’t, he is sorry and envious.
86. Who is very dear to K ṛṣṇ a? BG 12.15
When materialistic person is expecting some retaliation from an enemy, he is in a state
of fear, and when he cannot successfully execute something he becomes dejected. A
devotee who is always transcendental to all these disturbances is very dear to K ṛṣṇ a.
87. How a devotee is clean both inwardly and outwardly? Bg 12.16
Money may be offered to a devotee, but he should not struggle to acquire it. If
automatically, by the grace of the Supreme, money comes to him, he is not agitated.
Naturally a devotee takes a bath at least twice in a day and rises early in the morning
for devotional service. Thus he is naturally clean both inwardly and outwardly.
88. How a devotee is carefree? BG 12.16
A devotee is always expert because he fully knows the essence of all activities of life
and he is convinced of the authoritative scriptures. A devotee never takes the part of a
particular party; therefore he is carefree.
89. Why a pure devotee is never pained? BG 12.16
because he is free from all designations; he knows that his body is a designation, so if
there are some bodily pains, he is free.
90. How a pure devotee does not endeavor for anything which is against the principles of devotional service? BG
12.16
For example, constructing a big building requires great energy, and a devotee does not
take to such business if it does not beneﬁt him by advancing his devotional service. He
may construct a temple for the Lord, and for that he may take all kinds of anxiety, but
he does not construct a big house for his personal relations.
91. What are the more qualities of a pure devotee? BG 12.17
A pure devotee is neither happy nor distressed over material gain and loss, nor is he
very much anxious to get a son or disciple, nor is he distressed by not getting them.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-12 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/861942 11/1292. If a pure devotee loses anything which is very dear to him what he will do? Bg 12.17
he does not lament.
93. if he does not get what he desires what he will do? BG 12.17
he is not distressed. He is transcendental in the face of all kinds of auspicious,
inauspicious and sinful activities.
94. What a pure devotee risks for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord? BG 12.17
He is prepared to accept all kinds of risks for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord.
Nothing is an impediment in the discharge of his devotional service. Such a devotee is
very dear to K ṛṣṇ a.
95. What is the nature of human society? BG 12.18-19
A devotee is always free from all bad association. Sometimes one is praised and
sometimes one is defamed; that is the nature of human society. But a devotee is always
transcendental to artiﬁcial fame and infamy, distress or happiness. He is very patient.
96. Why a pure devotee is called silent? BG 12.18-19
He is very patient. He does not speak of anything but the topics about K ṛṣṇ a; therefore
he is called silent.
97. Is Silence means that one should not speak? BG 12.18-19
Silent does not mean that one should not speak; silent means that one should not speak
nonsense. One should speak only of essentials, and the most essential speech for the
devotee is to speak for the sake of the Supreme Lord.
98. How a devotee is happy in all conditions? BG 12.18-19
sometimes he may get very palatable foodstuffs, sometimes not, but he is satisﬁed. Nor
does he care for any residential facility. He may sometimes live underneath a tree, and
he may sometimes live in a very palatial building; he is attracted to neither
99. Why a pure devotee is called ﬁxed? BG 12.18-19
He is called ﬁxed because he is ﬁxed in his determination and knowledge. We may ﬁnd
some repetition in the descriptions of the qualiﬁcations of a devotee, but this is just to
emphasize the fact that a devotee must acquire all these qualiﬁcations. Without good
qualiﬁcations, one cannot be a pure devotee.
100. One who wants to be recognized as a devotee what should he do? BG 12.18-19
One who wants to be recognized as a devotee should develop the good qualiﬁcations.
Of course he does not extraneously endeavor to acquire these qualiﬁcations, but
engagement in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness and devotional service automatically helps him
develop them
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-12 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/861942 12/12101. The question of who is better – one who is engaged in the path of impersonal Brahman or one who is
engaged in the personal service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead – was raised by Arjuna? BG 12.20
the Lord replied to him so explicitly that there is no doubt that devotional service to
the Personality of Godhead is the best of all processes of spiritual realization.
