9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-9 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/849763 1/12Name: ___________________________________________ Date: ___________________
Bhagavad-gita chapter-9
1. How a devotee becomes enlightened? BG 9.1
As a devotee hears more and more about the Supreme Lord, he becomes enlightened.
2. How K ṛṣṇ a consciousness gives the devotee the intelligence to understand the science of K ṛṣṇ a ? BG 9.1
The devotees are constantly engaged in the Supreme Lord’s service. The Lord
understands the mentality and sincerity of a particular living entity who is engaged in
K ṛṣṇa consciousness and gives him the intelligence to understand the science of K ṛṣṇ a
in the association of devotees.
3. Who is the author of the Vedānta-sūtra? BG 9.2
Vyāsadeva, the author of the Vedānta-sūtra.
4. Who are the principal philosophers in India? BG 9.2
the principal philosophers in India are Gautama, Ka ṇ āda, Kapila, Yājñavalkya, Śā ṇḍ ilya
and Vaiśvānara. And ﬁnally there is Vyāsadeva
5. What is called pavitram uttamam? Bg 9.2
For those who are engaged in the devotional service of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, all sinful reactions, whether fructiﬁed, in the stock, or in the form of a seed,
gradually vanish. Therefore the purifying potency of devotional service is very strong,
and it is called pavitram uttamam,
6. What is Uttama means? BG 9.2
Uttama means transcendental.
7. What is dharmyam means? BG 9.2
The word dharmyam means “the path of religion.”
8. Who was Nārada? BG 9.2
Nārada was actually a son of a maidservant. He had no opportunity to go to school.
9. Whe one can understand what God is? BG 9.2
When one’s heart is cleared of all nonsense, then one can understand what God is.
10. How one can satisﬁes all the demigods and all other living entities? 9.3
By giving water to the root of a tree one satisﬁes its branches, twigs and leaves, and by
supplying food to the stomach one satisﬁes all the senses of the body. Similarly, by
engaging in the transcendental service of the Supreme Lord one automatically satisﬁes
all the demigods and all other living entities
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-9 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/849763 2/1211. What is calledis faith? BG 9.3
one should give up all other engagements and adopt the service of the Supreme Lord,
K ṛṣṇa, the Personality of Godhead. If one is convinced of this philosophy of life, that is
faith.
12. Who is called a ﬁrst-class person in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness? BG 9.3
As far as the development of faith is concerned, one who is well versed in the
literatures of devotional service and has attained the stage of ﬁrm faith is called a ﬁrst-
class person in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness.
13. Who is called second class? BG 9.3
in the second class are those who are not very advanced in understanding the
devotional scriptures but who automatically have ﬁrm faith that k ṛṣṇ a-bhakti, or
service to K ṛṣṇ a, is the best course and so in good faith have taken it up.
14. Who is third class person? BG 9.3
who have neither perfect knowledge of the scriptures nor good faith but by association
and simplicity are trying to follow. The third-class person in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness may
fall down,
15. What argument the Lord says? Bg 9.4
“I am everywhere, and everything is in Me, but still I am aloof.
16. What is the inconceivable opulence of the Lord? BG 9.5
Lord says, “Although they are situated on My inconceivable energy, as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead I am aloof from them.” This is the inconceivable opulence of
the Lord.
17. Why there is no difference between Lord mind and Himself? BG 9.5
The Lord explains this fact: although He is the maintainer and sustainer of the entire
material manifestation, He does not touch this material manifestation. Simply by His
supreme will, everything is created, everything is sustained, everything is maintained
and everything is annihilated. There is no difference between His mind and Himself
because he is absolute spirit
18. How can we explain that material creation is resting in Lord? BG 9.6
The sky may be the biggest manifestation we can conceive. And in that sky the wind or
air is the biggest manifestation in the cosmic world.Similarly, all the wonderful cosmic
manifestations are existing by the supreme will of God.
19. What we generally say about Lord? BG 9.6
not a blade of grass moves without the will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Thus everything is moving under His will: by His will everything is being created,
everything is being maintained, and everything is being annihilated.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-9 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/849763 3/1220. Describe the movement of the sun? 9.6
It is said that the sun is considered to be one of the eyes of the Supreme Lord and that
it has immense potency to diffuse heat and light. Still it is moving in its prescribed orbit
by the order and the supreme will of Govinda.
21. How The creation, maintenance and annihilation of this material world explained? Bg 9.7
The creation, maintenance and annihilation of this material cosmic manifestation are
completely dependent on the supreme will of the Personality of Godhead.
22. What is the meaning of At the end of the millennium? Bg 9.7
At the end of the millennium” means at the death of Brahmā. Brahmā lives for one
hundred years,
23. What is the caliculation of Brahma life? Bg 9.7
Brahma`s life is one day is calculated at 4,300,000,000 of our earthly years. His night is
of the same duration. His month consists of thirty such days and nights, and his year of
twelve months. After one hundred such years, when Brahmā dies, the devastation or
annihilation takes place
24. What is ﬁrst puru ṣ a incarnation? Bg 9.8
At the creation, the material energy is let loose as the mahat-tattva, into which the
Lord as His ﬁrst puru ṣ a incarnation, Mahā-vi ṣṇ u, enters.
25. Explain Mahā-vi ṣṇ u? BG9.8
Mahā-vi ṣṇ u lies within the Causal Ocean and breathes out innumerable universes,
26. What is Garbhodaka-śāyī Vi ṣṇ u? BG 9.8
into each universe the Lord again enters as Garbhodaka-śāyī Vi ṣṇ u. Each universe is in
that way created.
27. What is K ṣ īrodaka-śāyī Vi ṣṇ u? BG 9.8
K ṣīrodaka-śāyī Vi ṣṇ u enters into everything – even into the minute atom. This fact is
explained here. He enters into everything.
28. Why Lord is always neutral in the material activities of the created world? Bg 9.9
Lord is always involved in His eternal, blissful, spiritual activities, but He has nothing to
do with these material activities.” Material activities are being carried on by His
different potencies. The Lord is always neutral in the material activities of the created
world.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-9 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/849763 4/1229. Why neutrality is mentioned here with the word udāsīna-vat? BG 9.9
This neutrality is mentioned here with the word udāsīna-vat. Although He has control
over every minute detail of material activities, He is sitting as if neutral. The example
can be given of a high-court judge sitting on his bench. By his order so many things are
happening – someone is being hanged, someone is being put into jail, someone is
awarded a huge amount of wealth – but still he is neutral.
30. Who is supreme director? BG 9.10
It is clearly stated here that the Supreme Lord, although aloof from all the activities of
the material world, remains the supreme director.
31. What K ṛṣṇ a also states in Bhagavad-gītā? BG 9.10
that of all the living entities in different forms and species, “I am the father.” The
father gives seeds to the womb of the mother for the child, and similarly the Supreme
Lord by His mere glance injects all the living entities into the womb of material nature,
and they come out in their different forms and species, according to their last desires
and activities.
32. How material nature is activated? BG 9.10
Lord simply glances over material nature; material nature is thus activated, and
everything is created immediately. Because He glances over material nature, there is
undoubtedly activity on the part of the Supreme Lord, but He has nothing to do with
the manifestation of the material world directly.
33. Why there are many foolish men who consider K ṛṣṇ a to be merely a powerful man and nothing more? BG
9.10
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although appearing like a human being, is not a
common man. The Personality of Godhead, who conducts the creation, maintenance
and annihilation of the complete cosmic manifestation, cannot be a human being. Yet
there are many foolish men who consider K ṛṣṇ a to be merely a powerful man and
nothing more.
34. How K ṛṣṇ a is the supreme controller ? BG 9.10
K ṛṣṇa is the supreme controller; there are many controllers undoubtedly, both in the
material and spiritual world, but K ṛṣṇ a is the supreme controller (īśvara ḥ parama ḥ
k ṛṣṇa ḥ ), and His body is sac-cid-ānanda, nonmaterial.
35. What is the meaning of mama māyā duratyayā? BG 9.10
Lord claims that the material energy, although very powerful, is under His control, and
whoever surrenders unto Him can get out of the control of this material energy. If a
soul surrendered to K ṛṣṇ a can get out of the inﬂuence of material energy
36. Why Lord body is called here mānu ṣ īm? BG 9.11
Lord body is called here mānu ṣ īm because He is acting just like a man, a friend of
Arjuna’s, a politician involved in the Battle of Kuruk ṣ etra. In so many ways He is acting
just like an ordinary man, but actually His body is sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha – eternal bliss
and knowledge absolute.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-9 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/849763 5/1237. Who are neophyte devotee? BG 9.11
the neophyte is in the lowest stage. The neophyte devotee gives more attention to the
Deity in the temple than to other devotees
38. What kind of people certainly deluded? BG 9.12
It is a great offense, therefore, to consider K ṛṣṇ a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
to be an ordinary man. Those who do so are certainly deluded because they cannot
understand the eternal form of K ṛṣṇ a.
39. Who should be driven out from all rituals and activities of the śruti and the sm ṛ ti? BG 9.12
One who considers the body of K ṛṣṇ a to be material should be driven out from all
rituals and activities of the śruti and the sm ṛ ti. And if one by chance sees his face, one
should at once take bath in the Ganges to rid himself of infection.
40. Who will be gradually regress to the darkest region of creation? BG 9.12
People jeer at K ṛṣṇ a because they are envious of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Their destiny is certainly to take birth after birth in the species of atheistic and
demoniac life. Perpetually, their real knowledge will remain under delusion, and
gradually they will regress to the darkest region of creation.
41. Explain description of the mahātmā? BG 9.13
the description of the mahātmā is clearly given. The ﬁrst sign of the mahātmā is that he
is already situated in the divine nature. He is not under the control of material nature.
42. What is called daivī prak ṛ ti, divine nature? BG 9.13
Being marginal potency, as soon as the living entity is freed from the control of
material nature, he is put under the guidance of the spiritual nature. The guidance of
the spiritual nature is called daivī prak ṛ ti, divine nature.
43. How mahātmā is manufactured? BG 9.14
The mahātmā cannot be manufactured by rubber-stamping an ordinary man. His
symptoms are described here: a mahātmā is always engaged in chanting the glories of
the Supreme Lord K ṛṣṇ a, the Personality of Godhead. He has no other business. He is
always engaged in the gloriﬁcation of the Lord.
44. There are other devotees who are still lower, and these are divided into three
(1) he who worships himself as one with the Supreme Lord, (2) he who concocts some
form of the Supreme Lord and worships that, and (3) he who accepts the universal
form, the viśva-rūpa of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and worships that.
45. Who are most predominant? BG 9.15
those who worship themselves as the Supreme Lord, thinking themselves to be monists,
are most predominant. Such people think themselves to be the Supreme Lord, and in
this mentality they worship themselves.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-9 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/849763 6/1246. What is Jyoti ṣṭ oma? BG 9.16
The Vedic sacriﬁce known as Jyoti ṣṭ oma is also K ṛṣṇ a,
47. What is mentioned in the sm ṛ ti? BG 9.16
Lord Krishna is also the Mahā-yajña mentioned in the sm ṛ ti.
48. What are the different energy of K ṛṣṇ a? BG 9.16
The oblations offered to the Pit ṛ loka or the sacriﬁce performed to please the Pit ṛ loka,
considered as a kind of drug in the form of clariﬁed butter, is also K ṛṣṇ a. The mantras
chanted in this connection are also K ṛṣṇ a. And many other commodities made with milk
products for offering in the sacriﬁces are also K ṛṣṇ a. The ﬁre is also K ṛṣṇ a because ﬁre
is one of the ﬁve material elements and is therefore claimed as the separated energy of
K ṛṣṇa.
49. What is the word dhātā means ? BG 9.17
the word dhātā means “creator.” Not only are our father and mother parts and parcels
of K ṛṣṇ a, but the creator, grandmother and grandfather, etc., are also K ṛṣṇ a. Actually
any living entity, being part and parcel of K ṛṣṇ a, is K ṛṣṇ a.
50. What is the Vedic mantras the word o ṁ , called pra ṇ ava is? BG 9.17
In all the Vedic mantras the word o ṁ , called pra ṇ ava, is a transcendental sound
vibration and is also K ṛṣṇ a. And because in all the hymns of the four Vedas – Sāma,
Yajur, Ṛ g and Atharva – the pra ṇ ava, or o ṁ -kāra, is very prominent, it is understood to
be K ṛṣṇ a
51. What is Gati means? BG 9.18
Gati means the destination where we want to go. But the ultimate goal is K ṛṣṇ a,
although people do not know it.
52. Why one should take shelter of K ṛṣṇ a either for protection or for annihilation of his distress? BG 9.18
K ṛṣṇa is the supreme ruler because everything belongs to Him and everything exists on
His energy. K ṛṣṇ a, being situated in everyone’s heart, is the supreme witness. The
residences, countries or planets on which we live are also K ṛṣṇ a. K ṛṣṇ a is the ultimate
goal of shelter, and therefore one should take shelter of K ṛṣṇ a either for protection or
for annihilation of his distress.
53. What are the different energies of Krishna? BG 9.19
K ṛṣṇa, by His different energies, diffuses heat and light through the agency of
electricity and the sun. During the summer season it is K ṛṣṇ a who checks rain from
falling from the sky, and then during the rainy season He gives unceasing torrents of
rain.
54. What is the energy which sustains us by prolonging the duration of our life? BG 9.19
The energy which sustains us by prolonging the duration of our life is K ṛṣṇ a, and K ṛṣṇ a
meets us at the end as death.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-9 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/849763 7/1255. Whose pastimes in V ṛ ndāvana as two-handed Śyāmasundara, playing on a ﬂute? BG 9.19
Since K ṛṣṇ a is both matter and spirit, the gigantic universal form comprising all
material manifestations is also K ṛṣṇ a, and His pastimes in V ṛ ndāvana as two-handed
Śyāmasundara, playing on a ﬂute, are those of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
56. What is the word word trai-vidyā ḥ refers to? what are they?
The word trai-vidyā ḥ refers to the three Vedas – Sāma, Yajur and Ṛ g.
57. Who is called is called a tri-vedī? BG 9.20
A brāhma ṇ a who has studied these three Vedas is called a tri-vedī.
58. Who is the ultimate goal for the tri-vedīs? BG 9.20
K ṛṣṇa herein declares Himself to be the ultimate goal for the tri-vedīs. Actual tri-vedīs
take shelter under the lotus feet of K ṛṣṇ a and engage in pure devotional service to
satisfy the Lord.
59. How Devotional service begins with? BG 9.20
Devotional service begins with the chanting of the Hare K ṛṣṇ a mantra and side by side
trying to understand K ṛṣṇ a in truth.
60. How planetary systems will be ? BG 9.20
planetary systems or heavenly planets known as Maharloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka, etc.
Once situated on those higher planetary systems, one can satisfy his senses hundreds of
thousands of times better than on this planet.
61. Explain higher planetary systems? BG 9.21
One who is promoted to the higher planetary systems enjoys a longer duration of life
and better facilities for sense enjoyment, yet one is not allowed to stay there forever.
One is again sent back to this earth upon ﬁnishing the resultant fruits of pious
activities.
62. What makes the devotee perfect in self-realization?BG 9.22
one who think of K ṛṣṇ a twenty-four hours a day, being engaged in devotional service by
hearing, chanting, remembering, offering prayers, worshiping, serving the lotus feet of
the Lord, rendering other services, cultivating friendship and surrendering fully to the
Lord. Such activities are all auspicious and full of spiritual potencies, which make the
devotee perfect in self-realization,
63. What is clled yoga? BG 9.22
When the devotee perfect in self-realization, so that his only desire is to achieve the
association of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such a devotee undoubtedly
approaches the Lord without difﬁculty. This is called yoga.
64. What is K ṣema refers to ? BG 9.22
K ṣema refers to the merciful protection of the Lord.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-9 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/849763 8/1265. What Lord says about worshiping demi god? BG 9.23
Persons who are engaged in the worship of demigods are not very intelligent, although
such worship is offered to Me indirectly,” K ṛṣṇ a says.
66. How to satisfy the different ofﬁcers and directors of the Lord? BG 9.23
One has to follow the laws made by the government, not by the ofﬁcers or directors.
Similarly, everyone is to offer his worship to the Supreme Lord only. That will
automatically satisfy the different ofﬁcers and directors of the Lord.
67. Why K ṛṣṇ a does not approve the unnecessary worship of the demigods? BG 9.23
The ofﬁcers and directors are engaged as representatives of the government, and to
offer some bribe to the ofﬁcers and directors is illegal. This is stated here as avidhi-
pūrvakam. In other words, K ṛṣṇ a does not approve the unnecessary worship of the
demigods.
68. What is recommended in the Vedic literatures? BG 9.24
Here it is clearly stated that there are many types of yajña performances recommended
in the Vedic literatures
69. Who is the enjoyer and supreme master? BG 9.24
K ṛṣṇa says in this verse, “I am the enjoyer of all sacriﬁces because I am the supreme
master.
70. Why less intellegent people do not achieve the desired goal of life?Bg 9.24
Less intelligent persons, however, without knowing this fact, worship demigods for
temporary beneﬁt. Therefore they fall down to material existence and do not achieve
the desired goal of life.
71. How one can achieve the desired result? BG 9.24
anyone has any material desire to be fulﬁlled, he had better pray for it to the Supreme
Lord (although that is not pure devotion), and he will thus achieve the desired result.
72. How one can attain different heavenly planets? BG 9.25
Veda recommends a speciﬁc worship of demigods situated on different heavenly
planets. Similarly, one can attain the different planets by performing a speciﬁc yajña.
73. What is called “black arts” or “black magic? BG 9.25
one can go to many ghostly planets and become a Yak ṣ a, Rak ṣ a or Piśāca. Piśāca
worship is called “black arts” or “black magic.”
74. why can the pure devotee not achieve the planet of K ṛṣṇ a or Vi ṣṇ u? BG 9.25
Unfortunately many people have no information of these sublime planets where K ṛṣṇ a
and Vi ṣṇ u live, and because they do not know of them they fall down. Even the
impersonalists fall down from the brahma-jyotir.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-9 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/849763 9/1275. How one can become perfect in this life and go back home, back to Godhead? BG 9.25
The K ṛṣṇ a consciousness movement is therefore distributing sublime information to the
entire human society to the effect that by simply chanting the Hare K ṛṣṇ a mantra one
can become perfect in this life and go back home, back to Godhead.
76. What is process to achieve a permanent, blissful abode for eternal happiness? BG 9.26
The process of achieving such a marvelous result is very easy and can be attempted
even by the poorest of the poor, without any kind of qualiﬁcation. The only
qualiﬁcation required in this connection is to be a pure devotee of the Lord. It does not
matter what one is or where one is situated.
77. How Lord will be pleased? BG 9.26
The process is so easy that even a leaf or a little water or fruit can be offered to the
Supreme Lord in genuine love and the Lord will be pleased to accept it
78. Why Bhakti is mentioned twice in this verse? BG 9.26
Bhakti is mentioned twice in this verse in order to declare more emphatically that
bhakti, or devotional service, is the only means to approach K ṛṣṇ a. No other condition,
79. What one should avoids offering anything which is undesirable or unasked? BG 9.26
One who loves K ṛṣṇ a will give Him whatever He wants, and he avoids offering anything
which is undesirable or unasked. Thus meat, ﬁsh and eggs should not be offered to
K ṛṣṇa.
80. Why the offering to Lord should be made with an attitude of love? BG 9.26
preparing nice, simple vegetable dishes, offering them before the picture or Deity of
Lord K ṛṣṇ a and bowing down and praying for Him to accept such a humble offering
enable one to advance steadily in life, to purify the body, and to create ﬁne brain
tissues which will lead to clear thinking. Above all, the offering should be made with an
attitude of love.
81. How Krishna hearing is wholly identical with His eating and tasting? BG 9.26
K ṛṣṇa’s hearing the devotee’s words of love in offering foodstuffs is wholly identical
with His eating and actually tasting. This point should be emphasized: because of His
absolute position, His hearing is wholly identical with His eating and tasting.
82. Who can understand can understand that the Supreme Absolute Truth can eat food and enjoy it? BG 9.26
Only the devotee, who accepts K ṛṣṇ a as He describes Himself, without interpretation,
can understand that the Supreme Absolute Truth can eat food and enjoy it.
83. Why K ṛṣṇ a recommends herein that one should work for Him? BG 9.27
Thus, it is the duty of everyone to mold his life in such a way that he will not forget
K ṛṣṇa in any circumstance. Everyone has to work for maintenance of his body and soul
together, and K ṛṣṇ a recommends herein that one should work for Him.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-9 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/849763 10/1284. How Krishna accept foodstuff offered to him? BG 9.27
Everyone has to eat something to live; therefore he should accept the remnants of
foodstuffs offered to K ṛṣṇ a.
85. What is called arcana? BG 9.27
Any civilized man has to perform some religious ritualistic ceremonies; therefore K ṛṣṇ a
recommends, “Do it for Me,” and this is called arcana.
86. What is krishna recomend about charity? BG 9.27
Everyone has a tendency to give something in charity; K ṛṣṇ a says, “Give it to Me,” and
this means that all surplus money accumulated should be utilized in furthering the
K ṛṣṇa consciousness movement.
87. Who is the greatest meditator and the greatest yogī,? BG 9.27
Nowadays people are very much inclined to the meditational process, which is not
practical in this age, but if anyone practices meditating on K ṛṣṇ a twenty-four hours a
day by chanting the Hare K ṛṣṇ a mantra round his beads, he is surely the greatest
meditator and the greatest yogī,
88. What is called yukta? BG 9.28
One who acts in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness under superior direction is called yukta.
89. What is called yukta-vairāgya? BG 9.28
as long as we are in this material world we have to act; we cannot cease acting.
Therefore if actions are performed and the fruits are given to K ṛṣṇ a, then that is called
yukta-vairāgya.
90. How can one get liberation? BG 9.28
There are ﬁve different stages of liberation, and here it is speciﬁed that the devotee
who has always lived his lifetime here under the direction of the Supreme Lord, as
stated, has evolved to the point where he can, after quitting this body, go back to
Godhead and engage directly in the association of the Supreme Lord.
91. Why Lord say They are in Me? Bg 9.29
The very phrase “K ṛṣṇ a consciousness” suggests that those who are in such
consciousness are living transcendentalists, situated in Him. The Lord says here
distinctly, mayi te: “They are in Me.” Naturally, as a result, the Lord is also in them.
92. How transcendental reciprocation of both the Lord and the devotee explained here? BG 9.29
When a diamond is set in a golden ring, it looks very nice. The gold is glorified, and at
the same time the diamond is glorified. The Lord and the living entity eternally glitter,
and when a living entity becomes inclined to the service of the Supreme Lord he looks
like gold. The Lord is a diamond, and so this combination is very nice.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-9 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/849763 11/1293. Why Lord is like a desire tree? BG 9.29
The example is often given that the Lord is like a desire tree, and whatever one wants
from this desire tree, the Lord supplies. But here the explanation is more complete.
The Lord is here stated to be partial to the devotees. This is the manifestation of the
Lord’s special mercy to the devotees. The Lord’s reciprocation should not be
considered to be under the law of karma. It belongs to the transcendental situation in
which the Lord and His devotees function.
94. Why Devotional service to the Lord is not an activity of this material world? BG 9.29
Devotional service to the Lord is not an activity of this material world; it is part of the
spiritual world, where eternity, bliss and knowledge predominate.
95. The word su-durācāra ḥ used in this verse is why very significant? BG 9.30
we should understand it properly. When a living entity is conditioned, he has two kinds
of activities: one is conditional, and the other is constitutional.
96. What is called conditional activities? BG 9.30
As for protecting the body or abiding by the rules of society and state, certainly there
are different activities, even for the devotees, in connection with the conditional life,
and such activities are called conditional.
97. What is called constitutional activity? BG 9.30
the living entity who is fully conscious of his spiritual nature and is engaged in K ṛṣṇ a
consciousness, or the devotional service of the Lord, has activities which are called
transcendental. Such activities are performed in his constitutional activity
98. Why devotional service is always a success? BG 9.30
it is stated that if a person falls down but is wholeheartedly engaged in the
transcendental service of the Supreme Lord, the Lord, being situated within his heart,
purifies him and excuses him from that abomination. The material contamination is so
strong that even a yogī fully engaged in the service of the Lord sometimes becomes
ensnared; but K ṛṣṇ a consciousness is so strong that such an occasional falldown is at
once rectified.
99. what will protect a devotee from all accidental falldowns? BG 9.31
chanting of Hare K ṛṣṇ a should be continued without stoppage. This will protect a
devotee from all accidental falldowns. He will thus remain perpetually free from all
material contaminations.
100. Why there is no discrimination between the lower and higher classes of men for krishna consciousness? BG
9.32
it is stated that even the lowest, who are called ca ṇḍ ālas (dog-eaters), can be purified
by association with a pure devotee. Therefore devotional service and the guidance of a
pure devotee are so strong that there is no discrimination between the lower and
higher classes of men; anyone can take to it.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-9 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/849763 12/12101. How can become much greater than great jñānīs and yogīs? BG 9.32
Supreme Lord can enable people of all the lower classes to attain the highest
perfection of life. This is possible only when one takes shelter of K ṛṣṇ a. As indicated
here by the word vyapāśritya, one has to take shelter completely of K ṛṣṇ a. Then one
can become much greater than great jñānīs and yogīs.
102. What Lord say about this material world? BG 9.33
In this material world there are classifications of people, but, after all, this world is not
a happy place for anyone. It is clearly stated here, anityam asukha ṁ lokam: this world
is temporary and full of miseries, not habitable for any sane gentleman. This world is
declared by the Supreme Personality of Godhead to be temporary and full of miseries.
103. How all problems of all classes of men can be solved? BG 9.33
Everyone should attach himself to the bosom of the Supreme Personality of Godhead so
that he can be eternally happy. The devotional service of the Supreme Lord is the only
process by which all problems of all classes of men can be solved.
104. Why Lord says, to Arjuna “Take to My devotional service and come quickly back to Godhead? BG 9.33
Arjuna was born in a saintly royal family. To him also the Lord says, “Take to My
devotional service and come quickly back to Godhead, back home.” No one should
remain in this temporary world, full as it is with miseries.
105. Why K ṛṣṇ a consciousness is the only means of being delivered from the clutches of this contaminated
material world? BG 9.34
Lord says Engage your mind always in thinking of Me, become My devotee, offer
obeisances to Me and worship Me. Being completely absorbed in Me, surely you will
come to Me.
