association of pure devotees, takes directly to Krsna consciousness,
that is the best way. And that is recommended in this chapter. Toachieve success in this way, one must first find the proper spiritualmaster and receive training under his direction. Then one can achievefaith in the Supreme. When that faith matures, in course of time, it iscalled love of God. This love is the ultimate goal of the livingentities. One should, therefore, take to Krsna consciousness directly.That is the message of this Seventeenth Chapter.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Seventeenth Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of the Divisions of Faith.
Chapter 18
Conclusion--The Perfection of Renunciation
TEXT 1
arjuna uvaca
sannyasasya maha-bahotattvam icchami veditumtyagasya ca hrsikesaprthak kesi-nisudana
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; sannyasasya--renunciation; maha-baho--O
mighty-armed one; tattvam--truth; icchami--I wish; veditum--tounderstand; tyagasya--of renunciation; ca--also; hrsikesa--O master ofthe senses; prthak--differently; kesi-nisudana--O killer of the Kesidemon.
TRANSLATIONArjuna said, O mighty-armed one, I wish to understand the purpose of
renunciation [tyaga] and of the renounced order of life [sannyasa], Okiller of the Kesi demon, Hrsikesa.
PURPORTActually the Bhagavad-gita is finished in seventeen chapters. The
Eighteenth Chapter is a supplementary summarization of the topicsdiscussed before. In every chapter of Bhagavad-gita, Lord Krsnastresses that devotional service unto the Supreme Personality ofGodhead is the ultimate goal of life. This same point is summarized inthe Eighteenth Chapter as the most confidential path of knowledge. Inthe first six chapters, stress was given to devotional service: yoginamapi sarvesam... "Of all yogis or transcendentalists, one who alwaysthinks of Me within himself is best." In the next six chapters, puredevotional service and its nature and activity were discussed. In thethird six chapters, knowledge, renunciation, the activities of materialnature and transcendental nature, and devotional service weredescribed. It was concluded that all acts should be performed inconjunction with the Supreme Lord, summarized by the words om tat sat,which indicate Visnu, the Supreme Person. In the third part ofBhagavad-gita, devotional service was established by the example ofpast acaryas and the Brahma-sutra, the Vedanta-sutra, which cites thatdevotional service is the ultimate purpose of life and nothing else.Certain impersonalists consider themselves monopolizers of the
knowledge of Vedanta-sutra, but actually the Vedanta-sutra is meant for
understanding devotional service, for the Lord Himself is the composerof the Vedanta-sutra, and He is its knower. That is described in theFifteenth Chapter. In every scripture, every Veda, devotional serviceis the objective. That is explained in Bhagavad-gita.As in the Second Chapter a synopsis of the whole subject matter wasdescribed, similarly, in the Eighteenth Chapter also the summary of allinstruction is given. The purpose of life is indicated to berenunciation and attainment of the transcendental position above thethree material modes of nature. Arjuna wants to clarify the twodistinct subject matters of Bhagavad-gita, namely renunciation (tyaga)and the renounced order of life (sannyasa). Thus he is asking themeaning of these two words.Two words used in this verse to address the Supreme Lord--Hrsikesa andKesi-nisudana--are significant. Hrsikesa is Krsna, the master of allsenses, who can always help us attain mental serenity. Arjuna requestsHim to summarize everything in such a way that he can remainequipoised. Yet he has some doubts, and doubts are always compared todemons. He therefore addresses Krsna as Kesi-nisudana. Kesi was a mostformidable demon who was killed by the Lord; now Arjuna is expectingKrsna to kill the demon of doubt.
TEXT 2
sri-bhagavan uvaca
kamyanam karmanam nyasamsannyasam kavayo viduhsarva-karma-phala-tyagamprahus tyagam vicaksanah
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; kamyanam--
with desire; karmanam--activities; nyasam--renunciation; sannyasam--renounced order of life; kavayah--the learned; viduh--know; sarva--ofall; karma--activities; phala--of results; tyagam--renunciation;prahuh--call; tyagam--renunciation; vicaksanah--the experienced.
TRANSLATIONThe Supreme Lord said, to give up the results of all activities is
called renunciation [tyaga] by the wise. And that state is called therenounced order of life [sannyasa] by great learned men.
PURPORTThe performance of activities for results has to be given up. This is
the instruction of Bhagavad-gita. But activities leading to advancedspiritual knowledge are not to be given up. This will be made clear inthe next verse. There are many prescriptions of methods for performingsacrifice for some particular purpose in the Vedic literatures. Thereare certain sacrifices to perform to attain a good son or to attainelevation to the higher planets, but sacrifices prompted by desiresshould be stopped. However, sacrifice for the purification of one'sheart or for advancement in the spiritual science should not be givenup.
TEXT 3
tyajyam dosa-vad ity eke
karma prahur manisinahyajna-dana-tapah-karmana tyajyam iti capare
SYNONYMStyajyam--must be given up; dosa-vat--as an evil; iti--thus; eke--one
group; karma--work; prahuh--said; manisinah--of great thinkers; yajna--sacrifice; dana--charity; tapah--penance; karma--work; na--never;tyajyam--is to be given up; iti--thus; ca--certainly; apare--others.
TRANSLATIONSome learned men declare that all kinds of fruitive activities should
be given up, but there are yet other sages who maintain that acts ofsacrifice, charity and penance should never be abandoned.
PURPORTThere are many activities in the Vedic literatures which are subjects
of contention. For instance, it is said that an animal can be killed ina sacrifice, yet some maintain animal killing is completely abominable.Although animal killing in a sacrifice is recommended in the Vedicliterature, the animal is not considered to be killed. The sacrifice isto give a new life to the animal. Sometimes the animal is given a newanimal life after being killed in the sacrifice, and sometimes theanimal is promoted immediately to the human form of life. But there aredifferent opinions among the sages. Some say that animal killing shouldalways be avoided, and others say that for a specific sacrifice it isgood. All these different opinions on sacrificial activity are nowbeing clarified by the Lord Himself.
TEXT 4
niscayam srnu me tatra
tyage bharata-sattamatyago hi purusa-vyaghratri-vidhah samprakirtitah
SYNONYMSniscayam--certainty; srnu--hear; me--from Me; tatra--there; tyage--in
the matter of renunciation; bharata-sat-tama--O best of the Bharatas;tyagah--renunciation; hi--certainly; purusa-vyaghra--O tiger amonghuman beings; tri-vidhah--three kinds; samprakirtitah--is declared.
TRANSLATIONO best of the Bharatas, hear from Me now about renunciation. O tiger
among men, there are three kinds of renunciation declared in thescriptures.
PURPORTAlthough there are differences of opinion about renunciation, here the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, gives His judgment, which
should be taken as final. After all, the Vedas are different laws given
by the Lord. Here the Lord is personally present, and His word shouldbe taken as final. The Lord says that the process of renunciationshould be considered in terms of the modes of material nature in whichthey are performed.
TEXT 5
yajna-dana-tapah-karma
na tyajyam karyam eva tatyajno danam tapas caivapavanani manisinam
SYNONYMSyajna--sacrifice; dana--charity; tapah--penance; karma--activities; na-
-never; tyajyam--to be given up; karyam--must be done; eva--certainly;tat--that; yajnah--sacrifice; danam--charity; tapah--penance; ca--also;eva--certainly; pavanani--purifying; manisinam--even of the greatsouls.
TRANSLATIONActs of sacrifice, charity and penance are not to be given up but
should be performed. Indeed, sacrifice, charity and penance purify eventhe great souls.
PURPORTThe yogis should perform acts for the advancement of human society.
There are many purificatory processes for advancing a human being tospiritual life. The marriage ceremony, for example, is considered to beone of these sacrifices. It is called vivaha-yajna. Should a sannyasi,who is in the renounced order of life and who has given up his familyrelations, encourage the marriage ceremony? The Lord says here that anysacrifice which is meant for human welfare should never be given up.Vivaha-yajna, the marriage ceremony, is meant to regulate the humanmind to become peaceful for spiritual advancement. For most men, thisvivaha-yajna should be encouraged even by persons in the renouncedorder of life. Sannyasis should never associate with women, but thatdoes not mean that one who is in the lower stages of life, a young man,should not accept a wife in the marriage ceremony. All prescribedsacrifices are meant for achieving the Supreme Lord. Therefore, in thelower stages, they should not be given up. Similarly, charity is forthe purification of the heart. If charity is given to suitable persons,as described previously, it leads one to advanced spiritual life.
TEXT 6
etany api tu karmani
sangam tyaktva phalani cakartavyaniti me parthaniscitam matam uttamam
SYNONYMSetani--all this; api--certainly; tu--must; karmani--activities; sangam-
-association; tyaktva--renouncing; phalani--results; ca--also;
kartavyani--as duty; iti--thus; me--My; partha--O son of Prtha;
niscitam--definite; matam--opinion; uttamam--the best.
TRANSLATION
All these activities should be performed without any expectation of
result. They should be performed as a matter of duty, O son of Prtha.That is My final opinion.
PURPORTAlthough all sacrifices are purifying, one should not expect any result
by such performances. In other words, all sacrifices which are meantfor material advancement in life should be given up, but sacrificesthat purify one's existence and elevate one to the spiritual planeshould not be stopped. Everything that leads to Krsna consciousnessmust be encouraged. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam also it is said that anyactivity which leads to devotional service to the Lord should beaccepted. That is the highest criterion of religion. A devotee of theLord should accept any kind of work, sacrifice or charity which willhelp him in the discharge of devotional service to the Lord.
TEXT 7
niyatasya tu sannyasah
karmano nopapadyatemohat tasya parityagastamasah parikirtitah
SYNONYMSniyatasya--prescribed duties; tu--but; sannyasah--renunciation;
karmanah--activities; na--never; upapadyate--is deserved; mohat--byillusion; tasya--of which; parityagah--renunciation; tamasah--in themode of ignorance; parikirtitah--is declared.
TRANSLATIONPrescribed duties should never be renounced. If, by illusion, one gives
up his prescribed duties, such renunciation is said to be in the modeof ignorance.
PURPORTWork for material satisfaction must be given up, but activities which
promote one to spiritual activity, like cooking for the Supreme Lordand offering the food to the Lord and then accepting the food, arerecommended. It is said that a person in the renounced order of lifeshould not cook for himself. Cooking for oneself is prohibited, butcooking for the Supreme Lord is not prohibited. Similarly, a sannyasimay perform a marriage ceremony to help his disciple in the advancementof Krsna consciousness. If one renounces such activities, it is to beunderstood that he is acting in the mode of darkness.
TEXT 8
duhkham ity eva yat karma
kaya-klesa-bhayat tyajet
sa krtva rajasam tyagamnaiva tyaga-phalam labhet
SYNONYMSduhkham--unhappy; iti--thus; eva--certainly; yat--that which; karma--
work; kaya--body; klesa--troublesome; bhayat--out of fear; tyajet--gives up; sah--that; krtva--after doing; rajasam--in the mode ofpassion; tyagam--renunciation; na eva--certainly not; tyaga--renounced;phalam--results; labhet--gain.
TRANSLATIONAnyone who gives up prescribed duties as troublesome, or out of fear,
is said to be in the mode of passion. Such action never leads to theelevation of renunciation.
PURPORTOne who is in Krsna consciousness should not give up earning money out
of fear that he is performing fruitive activities. If by working onecan engage his money in Krsna consciousness, or if by rising early inthe morning one can advance his transcendental Krsna consciousness, oneshould not desist out of fear or because such activities are consideredtroublesome. Such renunciation is in the mode of passion. The result ofpassionate work is always miserable. Even if a person renounces work inthat spirit, he never gets the result of renunciation.
TEXT 9
karyam ity eva yat karma
niyatam kriyate 'rjunasangam tyaktva phalam caivasa tyagah sattviko matah
SYNONYMSkaryam--must be done; iti--thus; eva--thus; yat--that which; karma--
work; niyatam--prescribed; kriyate--performed; arjuna--O Arjuna;sangam--association; tyaktva--giving up; phalam--result; ca--also; eva--certainly; sah--that; tyagah--renunciation; sattvikah--in the mode ofgoodness; matah--in My opinion.
TRANSLATIONBut he who performs his prescribed duty only because it ought to be
done, and renounces all attachment to the fruit--his renunciation is ofthe nature of goodness, O Arjuna.
PURPORTPrescribed duties must be performed with this mentality. One should act
without attachment for the result; he should be disassociated from themodes of work. A man working in Krsna consciousness in a factory doesnot associate himself with the work of the factory, nor with theworkers of the factory. He simply works for Krsna. And when he gives upthe result for Krsna, he is acting transcendentally.
TEXT 10
na dvesty akusalam karma
kusale nanusajjatetyagi sattva-samavistomedhavi chinna-samsayah
SYNONYMSna--never; dvesti--hates; akusalam--inauspicious; karma--work; kusale--
in the auspicious; na--nor; anusajjate--becomes attached; tyagi--therenouncer; sattva--goodness; samavistah--absorbed in; medhavi--intelligent; chinna--cut up; samsayah--all doubts.
TRANSLATIONThose who are situated in the mode of goodness, who neither hate
inauspicious work nor are attached to auspicious work, have no doubtsabout work.
PURPORTA person in Krsna consciousness or in the mode of goodness does not
hate anyone or anything which troubles his body. He does work in theproper place and at the proper time without fearing the troublesomeeffects of his duty. Such a person situated in transcendence should beunderstood to be most intelligent and beyond all doubts in hisactivities.
TEXT 11
na hi deha-bhrta sakyam
tyaktum karmany asesatahyas tu karma-phala-tyagisa tyagity abhidhiyate
SYNONYMSna--never; hi--certainly; deha-bhrta--of the embodied; sakyam--
possible; tyaktum--to renounce; karmani--activities of; asesatah--altogether; yah tu--anyone who; karma--work; phala--results; tyagi--renouncer; sah--he; tyagi--the renouncer; iti--thus; abhidhiyate--it issaid.
TRANSLATIONIt is indeed impossible for an embodied being to give up all
activities. Therefore it is said that he who renounces the fruits ofaction is one who has truly renounced.
PURPORTIt is said in Bhagavad-gita that one can never give up work at any
time. Therefore he who works for Krsna and does not enjoy the fruitiveresults, who offers everything to Krsna, is actually a renouncer. Thereare many members of the International Society for Krishna Consciousnesswho work very hard in their office or in the factory or some other
place, and whatever they earn they give to the Society. Such highly
elevated souls are actually sannyasis and are situated in the renouncedorder of life. It is clearly outlined here how to renounce the fruitsof work and for what purpose fruits should be renounced.
TEXT 12
anistam istam misram ca
tri-vidham karmanah phalambhavaty atyaginam pretyana tu sannyasinam kvacit
SYNONYMSanistam--leading to hell; istam--leading to heaven; misram ca--or
mixture; tri-vidham--three kinds; karmanah--work; phalam--result;bhavati--becomes; atyaginam--of the renouncer; pretya--after death; natu--but not; sannyasinam--of the renounced order; kvacit--at any time.
TRANSLATIONFor one who is not renounced, the threefold fruits of action--
desirable, undesirable and mixed--accrue after death. But those who arein the renounced order of life have no such results to suffer or enjoy.
PURPORTA person in Krsna consciousness acting in knowledge of his relationship
with Krsna is always liberated. Therefore he does not have to enjoy orsuffer the results of his acts after death.
TEXT 13
pancaitani maha-baho
karanani nibodha mesankhye krtante proktanisiddhaye sarva-karmanam
adhisthanam tatha karta
karanam ca prthag-vidhamvividhas ca prthak cestadaivam caivatra pancamam
SYNONYMSpanca--five; etani--all these; maha-baho--O mighty-armed one; karanani-
-cause; nibodha--just understand; me--from Me; sankhye--in the Vedas;krta-ante--after performance; proktani--said; siddhaye--perfection;sarva--all; karmanam--actuated. adhisthanam--place; tatha--also; karta--worker; karanam ca--and instruments; prthak-vidham--different kinds;vividhah ca--varieties; prthak--separately; cestah--endeavor; daivam--the Supreme; ca--also; eva--certainly; atra--here; pancamam--five.
TRANSLATIONO mighty-armed Arjuna, learn from Me of the five factors which bring
about the accomplishment of all action. These are declared in sankhya
philosophy to be the place of action, the performer, the senses, the
endeavor, and ultimately the Supersoul.
PURPORTA question may be raised that since any activity performed must have
some reaction, how is it that the person in Krsna consciousness doesnot suffer or enjoy the reactions of work? The Lord is citing Vedantaphilosophy to show how this is possible. He says that there are fivecauses for all activities, and for success in all activity, one shouldknow these five causes. Sankhya means the stalk of knowledge, andVedanta is the final stalk of knowledge accepted by all leadingacaryas. Even Sankara accepts Vedanta-sutra as such. Therefore suchauthority should be consulted.The ultimate will is invested in the Supersoul, as it is stated in theGita, sarvasya caham hrdi sannivistah. He is engaging everyone incertain activities. Acts done under His direction from within yield noreaction, either in this life or in the life after death.The instruments of action are the senses, and by senses the soul actsin various ways, and for each and every action there is a differentendeavor. But all one's activities depend on the will of the Supersoul,who is seated within the heart as a friend. The Supreme Lord is thesupercause. Under these circumstances, he who is acting in Krsnaconsciousness under the direction of the Supersoul situated within theheart is naturally not bound by any activity. Those in complete Krsnaconsciousness are not ultimately responsible for their actions.Everything is dependent on the supreme will, the Supersoul, the SupremePersonality of Godhead.
TEXT 15
sarira-van-manobhir yat
karma prarabhate narahnyayyam va viparitam vapancaite tasya hetavah
SYNONYMSsarira--body; vak--speech; manobhih--by the mind; yat--anything; karma-
-work; prarabhate--begins; narah--a person; nyayyam--right; va--or;viparitam--the opposite; va--or; panca--five; ete--all these; tasya--its; hetavah--causes.
TRANSLATIONWhatever right or wrong action a man performs by body, mind or speech
is caused by these five factors.
PURPORTThe words "right" and "wrong" are very significant in this verse. Right
work is work done in terms of the prescribed directions in thescriptures, and wrong work is work done against the principles of thescriptural injunctions. But whatever is done requires these fivefactors for its complete performance.
TEXT 16
tatraivam sati kartaram
atmanam kevalam tu yahpasyaty akrta-buddhitvanna sa pasyati durmatih
SYNONYMStatra--there; evam--certainly; sati--being; kartaram--of the worker;
atmanam--the self; kevalam--only; tu--but; yah--anyone; pasyati--sees;akrta-buddhitvat--due to unintelligence; na--never; sah--he; pasyati--sees; durmatih--foolish.
TRANSLATIONTherefore one who thinks himself the only doer, not considering the
five factors, is certainly not very intelligent and cannot see thingsas they are.
PURPORTA foolish person cannot understand that the Supersoul is sitting as a
friend within and conducting his actions. Although the material causesare the place, the worker, the endeavor and the senses, the final causeis the Supreme, the Personality of Godhead. Therefore, one should seenot only the four material causes, but the supreme efficient cause aswell. One who does not see the Supreme thinks himself to be the doer.
TEXT 17
yasya nahankrto bhavo
buddhir yasya na lipyatehatvapi sa imal lokanna hanti na nibadhyate
SYNONYMSyasya--of one who; na--never; ahankrtah--false ego; bhavah--nature;
buddhih--intelligence; yasya--one who; na--never; lipyate--is attached;hatva api--even killing; sah--he; iman--this; lokan--world; na--never;hanti--kills; na--never; nibadhyate--becomes entangled.
TRANSLATIONOne who is not motivated by false ego, whose intelligence is not
entangled, though he kills men in this world, is not the slayer. Nor ishe bound by his actions.
PURPORTIn this verse the Lord informs Arjuna that the desire not to fight
arises from false ego. Arjuna thought himself to be the doer of action,but he did not consider the supreme sanction within and without. If onedoes not know that a supersanction is there, why should he act? But onewho knows the instrument of work, himself as the worker, and theSupreme Lord as the supreme sanctioner is perfect in doing everything.Such a person is never in illusion. Personal activity andresponsibility arise from false ego and godlessness, or a lack of Krsnaconsciousness. Anyone who is acting in Krsna consciousness under the
direction of the Supersoul or the Supreme Personality of Godhead, even
though killing, does not kill. Nor is he ever affected with thereaction of such killing. When a soldier kills under the command of asuperior officer, he is not subject to be judged. But if a soldierkills on his own personal account, then he is certainly judged by acourt of law.
TEXT 18
jnanam jneyam parijnata
tri-vidha karma-codanakaranam karma kartetitri-vidhah karma-sangrahah
SYNONYMSjnanam--knowledge; jneyam--objective; parijnata--the knower; tri-vidha-
-three kinds; karma--work; codana--impetus; karanam--the senses; karma--work; karta--the doer; iti--thus; tri-vidhah--three kinds; karma--work; sangrahah--accumulation.
TRANSLATIONKnowledge, the object of knowledge and the knower are the three factors
which motivate action; the senses, the work and the doer comprise thethreefold basis of action.
PURPORTThere are three kinds of impetus for daily work: knowledge, the object
of knowledge and the knower. The instruments of work, the work itselfand the worker are called the constituents of work. Any work done byany human being has these elements. Before one acts, there is someimpetus, which is called inspiration. Any solution arrived at beforework is actualized is a subtle form of work. Then work takes the formof action. First one has to undergo the psychological processes ofthinking, feeling and willing, and that is called impetus. Actually thefaith to perform acts is called knowledge. The inspiration to work isthe same if it comes from the scripture or from the instruction of thespiritual master. When the inspiration is there and the worker isthere, then actual activity takes place by the help of the senses. Themind is the center of all senses, and the object is work itself. Theseare the different phases of work as described in Bhagavad-gita. The sumtotal of all activities is called accumulation of work.
TEXT 19
jnanam karma ca karta ca
tridhaiva guna-bhedatahprocyate guna-sankhyaneyathavac chrnu tany api
SYNONYMSjnanam--knowledge; karma--work; ca--also; karta--worker; ca--also;
tridha--three kinds; eva--certainly; guna-bhedatah--in terms ofdifferent modes of material nature; procyate--is said; guna-sankhyane--
in terms of different modes; yatha-vat--as they act; srnu--hear; tani--
all of them; api--also.
TRANSLATIONIn accordance with the three modes of material nature, there are three
kinds of knowledge, action, and performers of action. Listen as Idescribe them.
PURPORTIn the Fourteenth Chapter the three divisions of the modes of material
nature were elaborately described. In that chapter it was said that themode of goodness is illuminating, the mode of passion materialistic,and the mode of ignorance conducive to laziness and indolence. All themodes of material nature are binding; they are not sources ofliberation. Even in the mode of goodness one is conditioned. In theSeventeenth Chapter, the different types of worship by different typesof men in different modes of material nature were described. In thisverse, the Lord wishes to speak about the different types of knowledge,workers, and work itself according to the three material modes.
TEXT 20
sarva-bhutesu yenaikam
bhavam avyayam iksateavibhaktam vibhaktesutaj jnanam viddhi sattvikam
SYNONYMSsarva-bhutesu--in all living entities; yena--by whom; ekam--one;
bhavam--situation; avyayam--imperishable; iksate--does see; avibhaktam--undivided; vibhaktesu--in the numberless divided; tat--that; jnanam--knowledge; viddhi--know; sattvikam--in the mode of goodness.
TRANSLATIONThat knowledge by which one undivided spiritual nature is seen in all
existences, undivided in the divided, is knowledge in the mode ofgoodness.
PURPORTA person who sees one spirit soul in every living being, whether a
demigod, human being, animal, bird, beast, aquatic or plant, possessesknowledge in the mode of goodness. In all living entities, one spiritsoul is there, although they have different bodies in terms of theirprevious work. As described in the Seventh Chapter, the manifestationof the living force in every body is due to the superior nature of theSupreme Lord. Thus to see that one superior nature, that living force,in every body is to see in the mode of goodness. That living energy isimperishable, although the bodies are perishable. The difference isperceived in terms of the body because there are many forms of materialexistence in conditional life; therefore they appear to be divided.Such impersonal knowledge finally leads to self-realization.
TEXT 21
prthaktvena tu yaj jnanam
nana-bhavan prthag-vidhanvetti sarvesu bhutesutaj jnanam viddhi rajasam
SYNONYMSprthaktvena--because of division; tu--but; yat jnanam--which knowledge;
nana-bhavan--multifarious situations; prthak-vidhan--differently;vetti--one who knows; sarvesu--in all; bhutesu--living entities; tatjnanam--that knowledge; viddhi--must be known; rajasam--in terms ofpassion.
TRANSLATIONThat knowledge by which a different type of living entity is seen to be
dwelling in different bodies is knowledge in the mode of passion.
PURPORTThe concept that the material body is the living entity and that with
the destruction of the body the consciousness is also destroyed iscalled knowledge in the mode of passion. According to that knowledge,bodies differ from one another because of the development of differenttypes of consciousness, otherwise there is no separate soul whichmanifests consciousness. The body is itself the soul, and there is noseparate soul beyond the body. According to such knowledge,consciousness is temporary. Or else there are no individual souls, butthere is an all-pervading soul, which is full of knowledge, and thisbody is a manifestation of temporary ignorance. Or beyond this bodythere is no special individual or supreme soul. All such conceptionsare considered products of the mode of passion.
TEXT 22
yat tu krtsna-vad ekasmin
karye saktam ahaitukamatattvartha-vad alpam catat tamasam udahrtam
SYNONYMSyat--that which; tu--but; krtsna-vat--all in all; ekasmin--in one;
karye--work; saktam--attached; ahaitukam--without cause; atattva-artha-vat--without reality; alpam--very meager; ca--and; tat--that; tamasam--in the mode of darkness; udahrtam--is spoken.
TRANSLATIONAnd that knowledge by which one is attached to one kind of work as the
all in all, without knowledge of the truth, and which is very meager,is said to be in the mode of darkness.
PURPORTThe "knowledge" of the common man is always in the mode of darkness or
ignorance because every living entity in conditional life is born into
the mode of ignorance. One who does not develop knowledge through the
authorities or scriptural injunctions has knowledge that is limited tothe body. He is not concerned about acting in terms of the directionsof scripture. For him God is money, and knowledge means thesatisfaction of bodily demands. Such knowledge has no connection withthe Absolute Truth. It is more or less like the knowledge of theordinary animals: the knowledge of eating, sleeping, defending andmating. Such knowledge is described here as the product of the mode ofdarkness. In other words, knowledge concerning the spirit soul beyondthis body is called knowledge in the mode of goodness, and knowledgeproducing many theories and doctrines by dint of mundane logic andmental speculation is the product of the mode of passion, and knowledgeconcerned with only keeping the body comfortable is said to be in themode of ignorance.
TEXT 23
niyatam sanga-rahitam
araga-dvesatah krtamaphala-prepsuna karmayat tat sattvikam ucyate
SYNONYMSniyatam--regulative; sanga-rahitam--without attachment; araga-dvesatah-
-without love or hatred; krtam--done; aphala-prepsuna--without fruitiveresult; karma--acts; yat--which; tat--that; sattvikam--in the mode ofgoodness; ucyate--is called.
TRANSLATIONAs for actions, that action in accordance with duty, which is performed
without attachment, without love or hate, by one who has renouncedfruitive results, is called action in the mode of goodness.
PURPORTRegulated occupational duties, as prescribed in the scriptures in terms
of the different orders and divisions of society, performed withoutattachment or proprietary rights and therefore without any love orhatred, and performed in Krsna consciousness for the satisfaction ofthe Supreme, without self-satisfaction or self-gratification, arecalled actions in the mode of goodness.
TEXT 24
yat tu kamepsuna karma
sahankarena va punahkriyate bahulayasamtad rajasam udahrtam
SYNONYMSyat--that which; tu--but; kama-ipsuna--with fruitive result; karma--
work; sa-ahankarena--with ego; va--or; punah--again; kriyate--performed; bahula-ayasam--with great labor; tat--that; rajasam--in themode of passion; udahrtam--is said to be.
TRANSLATION
But action performed with great effort by one seeking to gratify his
desires, and which is enacted from a sense of false ego, is calledaction in the mode of passion.
TEXT 25
anubandham ksayam himsam
anapeksya ca paurusammohad arabhyate karmayat tat tamasam ucyate
SYNONYMSanubandham--future bondage; ksayam--destruction; himsam--violence;
anapeksya--without consideration of consequences; ca--also; paurusam--distressing to others; mohat--by illusion; arabhyate--begun; karma--work; yat--which; tat--that; tamasam--in the mode of ignorance; ucyate--is said to be.
TRANSLATIONAnd that action performed in ignorance and delusion without
consideration of future bondage or consequences, which inflicts injuryand is impractical, is said to be action in the mode of ignorance.
PURPORTOne has to give account of one's actions to the state or to the agents
of the Supreme Lord called the Yamadutas. Irresponsible work isdestructive because it destroys the regulative principles of scripturalinjunction. It is often based on violence and is distressing to otherliving entities. Such irresponsible work is carried out in the light ofone's personal experience. This is called illusion. And all suchillusory work is a product of the mode of ignorance.
TEXT 26
mukta-sango 'naham-vadi
dhrty-utsaha-samanvitahsiddhy-asiddhyor nirvikarahkarta sattvika ucyate
SYNONYMSmukta-sangah--liberated from all material association; anaham-vadi--
without false ego; dhrti-utsaha--with great enthusiasm; samanvitah--qualified in that way; siddhi--perfection; asiddhyoh--failure;nirvikarah--without change; karta--worker; sattvikah--in the mode ofgoodness; ucyate--is said to be.
TRANSLATIONThe worker who is free from all material attachments and false ego, who
is enthusiastic and resolute and who is indifferent to success orfailure, is a worker in the mode of goodness.
PURPORT
A person in Krsna consciousness is always transcendental to the
material modes of nature. He has no expectations for the result of thework entrusted to him because he is above false ego and pride. Still,he is always enthusiastic till the completion of such work. He does notworry about the distress undertaken; he is always enthusiastic. He doesnot care for success or failure; he is equal in both distress orhappiness. Such a worker is situated in the mode of goodness.
TEXT 27
ragi karma-phala-prepsur
lubdho himsatmako 'sucihharsa-sokanvitah kartarajasah parikirtitah
SYNONYMSragi--very much attached; karma-phala--to the fruit of the work;
prepsuh--desiring; lubdhah--greedy; himsa-atmakah--and always envious;asucih--unclean; harsa-soka-anvitah--complicated, with joy and sorrow;karta--such a worker; rajasah--in the mode of passion; parikirtitah--isdeclared.
TRANSLATIONBut that worker who is attached to the fruits of his labor and who
passionately wants to enjoy them, who is greedy, envious and impure andmoved by happiness and distress, is a worker in the mode of passion.
PURPORTA person is too much attached to a certain kind of work or to the
result because he has too much attachment for materialism or hearth andhome, wife and children. Such a person has no desire for higherelevation in life. He is simply concerned with making this world asmaterially comfortable as possible. He is generally very greedy, and hethinks that anything attained by him is permanent and never to be lost.Such a person is envious of others and prepared to do anything wrongfor sense gratification. Therefore such a person is unclean, and hedoes not care whether his earning is pure or impure. He is very happyif his work is successful and very much distressed when his work is notsuccessful. Such a man is in the mode of passion.
TEXT 28
ayuktah prakrtah stabdhah
satho naiskrtiko 'lasahvisadi dirgha-sutri cakarta tamasa ucyate
SYNONYMSayuktah--without reference to scriptural injunctions; prakrtah--
materialistic; stabdhah--obstinate; sathah--deceitful; naiskrtikah--expert in insulting others; alasah--lazy; visadi--morose; dirgha-sutri-
-procrastinating; ca--also; karta--worker; tamasah--in the mode of
ignorance; ucyate--is said to be.
TRANSLATIONAnd that worker who is always engaged in work against the injunctions
of the scripture, who is materialistic, obstinate, cheating and expertin insulting others, who is lazy, always morose and procrastinating, isa worker in the mode of ignorance.
PURPORTIn the scriptural injunctions we find what sort of work should be
performed and what sort of work should not be performed. Those who donot care for those injunctions engage in work not to be done, and suchpersons are generally materialistic. They work according to the modesof nature, not according to the injunctions of the scripture. Suchworkers are not very gentle, and generally they are always cunning andexpert in insulting others. They are very lazy; even though they havesome duty, they do not do it properly, and they put it aside to be donelater on. Therefore they appear to be morose. They procrastinate;anything which can be done in an hour they drag on for years. Suchworkers are situated in the mode of ignorance.
TEXT 29
buddher bhedam dhrtes caiva
gunatas tri-vidham srnuprocyamanam asesenaprthaktvena dhananjaya
SYNONYMSbuddheh--of intelligence; bhedam--differences; dhrteh--of steadiness;
ca--also; eva--certainly; gunatah--by the modes of material nature;tri-vidham--the three kinds of; srnu--just hear; procyamanam--asdescribed by Me; asesena--in detail; prthaktvena--differently;dhananjaya--O winner of wealth.
TRANSLATIONNow, O winner of wealth, please listen as I tell you in detail of the
three kinds of understanding and determination according to the threemodes of nature.
PURPORTNow after explaining knowledge, the object of knowledge and the knower,
in three different divisions according to the modes of material nature,the Lord is explaining the intelligence and determination of the workerin the same way.
TEXT 30
pravrttim ca nivrttim ca
karyakarye bhayabhayebandham moksam ca ya vettibuddhih sa partha sattviki
SYNONYMS
pravrttim--deserving; ca--also; nivrttim--not deserving; ca--and;
karya--work; akarye--reaction; bhaya--fearful; abhaye--fearlessness;bandham--obligation; moksam ca--and liberation; ya--that which; vetti--knows; buddhih--understanding; sa--that; partha--O son of Prtha;sattviki--in the mode of goodness.
TRANSLATIONO son of Prtha, that understanding by which one knows what ought to be
done and what ought not to be done, what is to be feared and what isnot to be feared, what is binding and what is liberating, thatunderstanding is established in the mode of goodness.
PURPORTActions which are performed in terms of the directions of the
scriptures are called pravrtti, or actions that deserve to beperformed, and actions which are not so directed are not to beperformed. One who does not know the scriptural directions becomesentangled in the actions and reactions of work. Understanding whichdiscriminates by intelligence is situated in the mode of goodness.
TEXT 31
yaya dharmam adharmam ca
karyam cakaryam eva caayathavat prajanatibuddhih sa partha rajasi
SYNONYMSyaya--by which; dharmam--principles of religion; adharmam--and
irreligion; ca--and; karyam--work; ca--also; akaryam--what ought not tobe done; eva--certainly; ca--also; ayatha-vat--not perfectly;prajanati--knows; buddhih--intelligence; sa--that; partha--O son ofPrtha; rajasi--in the mode of passion.
TRANSLATIONAnd that understanding which cannot distinguish between the religious
way of life and the irreligious, between action that should be done andaction that should not be done, that imperfect understanding, O son ofPrtha, is in the mode of passion.
PURPORTIntelligence in the mode of passion is always working perversely. It
accepts religions which are not actually religions and rejects actualreligion. All views and activities are misguided. Men of passionateintelligence understand a great soul to be a common man and accept acommon man as a great soul. They think truth to be untruth and acceptuntruth as truth. In all activities they simply take the wrong path;therefore their intelligence is in the mode of passion.
TEXT 32
adharmam dharmam iti ya
manyate tamasavrtasarvarthan viparitams cabuddhih sa partha tamasi
SYNONYMSadharmam--irreligion; dharmam--religion; iti--thus; ya--which; manyate-
-thinks; tamasa--by illusion; avrta--covered; sarva-arthan--all things;viparitan--the wrong direction; ca--also; buddhih--intelligence; sa--that; partha--O son of Prtha; tamasi--the mode of ignorance.
TRANSLATIONThat understanding which considers irreligion to be religion and
religion to be irreligion, under the spell of illusion and darkness,and strives always in the wrong direction, O Partha, is in the mode ofignorance.
PURPORTIntelligence in the mode of ignorance is always working the opposite of
the way it should. It accepts religions which are not actuallyreligions and rejects actual religion. Men in ignorance understand agreat soul to be a common man and accept a common man as a great soul.They think truth to be untruth and accept untruth as truth. In allactivities they simply take the wrong path; therefore theirintelligence is in the mode of ignorance.
TEXT 33
dhrtya yaya dharayate
manah-pranendriya-kriyahyogenavyabhicarinyadhrtih sa partha sattviki
SYNONYMSdhrtya--determination; yaya--by which; dharayate--is sustained; manah--
mind; prana--life; indriya--senses; kriyah--activities; yogena--by yogapractice; avyabhicarinya--without any break; dhrtih--suchdetermination; sa--that; partha--O son of Prtha; sattviki--in the modeof goodness.
TRANSLATIONO son of Prtha, that determination which is unbreakable, which is
sustained with steadfastness by yoga practice, and thus controls themind, life, and the acts of the senses, is in the mode of goodness.
PURPORTYoga is a means to understand the Supreme Soul. One who is steadily
fixed in the Supreme Soul with determination, concentrating one's mind,life and sensual activities on the Supreme, engages in Krsnaconsciousness. That sort of determination is in the mode of goodness.The word avyabhicarinya is very significant, for it refers to persons
who are engaged in Krsna consciousness and are never deviated by any
other activity.
TEXT 34
yaya tu dharma-kamarthan
dhrtya dharayate 'rjunaprasangena phalakanksidhrtih sa partha rajasi
SYNONYMSyaya--by which; tu--but; dharma-kama-arthan--for religiosity and
economic development; dhrtya--by determination; dharayate--in suchterms; arjuna--O Arjuna; prasangena--for that; phala-akanksi--desiringfruitive results; dhrtih--determination; sa--that; partha--O son ofPrtha; rajasi--in the mode of passion.
TRANSLATIONAnd that determination by which one holds fast to fruitive results in
religion, economic development and sense gratification is of the natureof passion, O Arjuna.
PURPORTAny person who is always desirous of fruitive results in religious or
economic activities, whose only desire is sense gratification, andwhose mind, life and senses are thus engaged, is in the mode ofpassion.
TEXT 35
yaya svapnam bhayam sokam
visadam madam eva cana vimuncati durmedhadhrtih sa partha tamasi
SYNONYMSyaya--by which; svapnam--dream; bhayam--fearfulness; sokam--
lamentation; visadam--moroseness; madam--illusion; eva--certainly; ca--also; na--never; vimuncati--is liberated; durmedha--unintelligent;dhrtih--determination; sa--that; partha--O son of Prtha; tamasi--in themode of ignorance.
TRANSLATIONAnd that determination which cannot go beyond dreaming, fearfulness,
lamentation, moroseness and, illusion--such unintelligent determinationis in the mode of darkness.
PURPORTIt should not be concluded that a person in the mode of goodness does
not dream. Here dream means too much sleep. Dreaming is always present;either in the mode of goodness, passion or ignorance, dreaming is anatural occurrence. But those who cannot avoid oversleeping, who cannot
avoid the pride of enjoying material objects and who are always
dreaming of lording it over the material world, whose life, mind andsenses are thus engaged, are considered to be in the mode of ignorance.
TEXT 36
sukham tv idanim tri-vidham
srnu me bharatarsabhaabhyasad ramate yatraduhkhantam ca nigacchati
yat tad agre visam iva
pariname 'mrtopamamtat sukham sattvikam proktamatma-buddhi-prasada-jam
SYNONYMSsukham--happiness; tu--but; idanim--now; tri-vidham--three kinds; srnu-
-hear; me--from Me; bharata-rsabha--O best amongst the Bharatas;abhyasat--by practice; ramate--enjoyer; yatra--where; duhkha--distress;antam--end; ca--also; nigacchati--gains. yat--that which; tat--that;agre--in the beginning; visam iva--like poison; pariname--at the end;amrta--nectar; upamam--compared to; tat--that; sukham--happiness;sattvikam--in the mode of goodness; proktam--is said; atma--self;buddhi--intelligence; prasada-jam--satisfactory.
TRANSLATIONO best of the Bharatas, now please hear from Me about the three kinds
of happiness which the conditioned soul enjoys, and by which hesometimes comes to the end of all distress. That which in the beginningmay be just like poison but at the end is just like nectar and whichawakens one to self-realization is said to be happiness in the mode ofgoodness.
PURPORTA conditioned soul tries to enjoy material happiness again and again.
Thus he chews the chewed, but, sometimes, in the course of suchenjoyment, he becomes relieved from material entanglement byassociation with a great soul. In other words, a conditioned soul isalways engaged in some type of sense gratification, but when heunderstands by good association that it is only a repetition of thesame thing, and he is awakened to his real Krsna consciousness, he issometimes relieved from such repetitive so-called happiness.In the pursuit of self-realization, one has to follow many rules andregulations to control the mind and the senses and to concentrate themind on the self. All these procedures are very difficult, bitter likepoison, but if one is successful in following the regulations and comesto the transcendental position, he begins to drink real nectar, and heenjoys life.
TEXT 38
visayendriya-samyogad
yat tad agre 'mrtopamampariname visam iva
tat sukham rajasam smrtam
SYNONYMSvisaya--objects of the senses; indriya--senses; samyogat--combination;
yat--which; tat--that; agre--in the beginning; amrta-upamam--just likenectar; pariname--at the end; visam iva--like poison; tat--that;sukham--happiness; rajasam--in the mode of passion; smrtam--isconsidered.
TRANSLATIONThat happiness which is derived from contact of the senses with their
objects and which appears like nectar at first but poison at the end issaid to be of the nature of passion.
PURPORTA young man and a young woman meet, and the senses drive the young man
to see her, to touch her and to have sexual intercourse. In thebeginning this may be very pleasing to the senses, but at the end, orafter some time, it becomes just like poison. They are separated orthere is divorce, there is lamentation, there is sorrow, etc. Suchhappiness is always in the mode of passion. Happiness derived from acombination of the senses and the sense objects is always a cause ofdistress and should be avoided by all means.
TEXT 39
yad agre canubandhe ca
sukham mohanam atmanahnidralasya-pramadotthamtat tamasam udahrtam
SYNONYMSyat--that which; agre--in the beginning; ca--also; anubandhe--by
binding; ca--also; sukham--happiness; mohanam--illusion; atmanah--ofthe self; nidra--sleeping; alasya--laziness; pramada--illusion; uttham--produced of; tat--that; tamasam--in the mode of ignorance; udahrtam--is said to be.
TRANSLATIONAnd that happiness which is blind to self-realization, which is
delusion from beginning to end and which arises from sleep, lazinessand illusion is said to be of the nature of ignorance.
PURPORTOne who takes pleasure in laziness and in sleep is certainly in the
mode of darkness, and one who has no idea how to act and how not to actis also in the mode of ignorance. For the person in the mode ofignorance, everything is illusion. There is no happiness either in thebeginning or the end. For the person in the mode of passion there mightbe some kind of ephemeral happiness in the beginning and at the enddistress, but for the person in the mode of ignorance there is onlydistress both in the beginning and at the end.
TEXT 40
na tad asti prthivyam va
divi devesu va punahsattvam prakrti-jair muktamyad ebhih syat tribhir gunaih
SYNONYMSna--not; tat--that; asti--there is; prthivyam--within the universe; va-
-or; divi--in the higher planetary system; devesu--amongst thedemigods; va--or; punah--again; sattvam--existence; prakrti-jaih--underthe influence of material nature; muktam--liberated; yat--that; ebhih--by this; syat--so becomes; tribhih--by three; gunaih--modes of materialnature.
TRANSLATIONThere is no being existing, either here or among the demigods in the
higher planetary systems, which is freed from the three modes ofmaterial nature.
PURPORTThe Lord here summarizes the total influence of the three modes of
material nature all over the universe.
TEXT 41
brahmana-ksatriya-visam
sudranam ca parantapakarmani pravibhaktanisvabhava-prabhavair gunaih
SYNONYMSbrahmana--the brahmanas; ksatriya--the ksatriyas; visam--the vaisyas;
sudranam--the sudras; ca--and; parantapa--O subduer of the enemies;karmani--activities; pravibhaktani--are divided; svabhava--own nature;prabhavaih--born of; gunaih--by the modes of material nature.
TRANSLATIONBrahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas and sudras are distinguished by their
qualities of work, O chastiser of the enemy, in accordance with themodes of nature.
TEXT 42
samo damas tapah saucam
ksantir arjavam eva cajnanam vijnanam astikyambrahma-karma svabhava-jam
SYNONYMS
samah--peacefulness; damah--self-control; tapah--austerity; saucam--
purity; ksantih--tolerance; arjavam--honesty; eva--certainly; ca--and;jnanam--knowledge; vijnanam--wisdom; astikyam--religiousness; brahma--of a brahmana; karma--duty; svabhava-jam--born of his own nature.
TRANSLATIONPeacefulness, self-control, austerity, purity, tolerance, honesty,
knowledge, wisdom and religiousness--these are the qualities by whichthe brahmanas work.
TEXT 43
sauryam tejo dhrtir daksyam
yuddhe capy apalayanamdanam isvara-bhavas caksatram karma svabhava-jam
SYNONYMSsauryam--heroism; tejah--power; dhrtih--determination; daksyam--
resourcefulness; yuddhe--in battle; ca--and; api--also; apalayanam--notfleeing; danam--generosity; isvara--leadership; bhavah--nature; ca--and; ksatram--ksatriya; karma--duty; svabhava-jam--born of his ownnature.
TRANSLATIONHeroism, power, determination, resourcefulness, courage in battle,
generosity, and leadership are the qualities of work for the ksatriyas.
TEXT 44
krsi-go-raksya-vanijyam
vaisya-karma svabhava-jamparicaryatmakam karmasudrasyapi svabhava-jam
SYNONYMSkrsi--plowing; go--cows; raksya--protection; vanijyam--trade; vaisya--
vaisya; karma--duty; svabhava-jam--born of his own nature; paricarya--service; atmakam--nature; karma--duty; sudrasya--of the sudra; api--also; svabhava-jam--born of his own nature.
TRANSLATIONFarming, cow protection and business are the qualities of work for the
vaisyas, and for the sudras there is labor and service to others.
TEXT 45
sve sve karmany abhiratah
samsiddhim labhate narahsva-karma-niratah siddhimyatha vindati tac chrnu
SYNONYMS
sve--own; sve--own; karmani--in work; abhiratah--following; samsiddhim-
-perfection; labhate--achieves; narah--a man; sva-karma--by his ownduty; niratah--engaged; siddhim--perfection; yatha--as; vindati--attains; tat--that; srnu--listen.
TRANSLATIONBy following his qualities of work, every man can become perfect. Now
please hear from Me how this can be done.
TEXT 46
yatah pravrttir bhutanam
yena sarvam idam tatamsva-karmana tam abhyarcyasiddhim vindati manavah
SYNONYMSyatah--from whom; pravrttih--the emanation; bhutanam--of all living
entities; yena--by whom; sarvam--all; idam--this; tatam--is pervaded;sva-karmana--in his own duties; tam--Him; abhyarcya--by worshiping;siddhim--perfection; vindati--achieves; manavah--a man.
TRANSLATIONBy worship of the Lord, who is the source of all beings and who is all-
pervading, man can, in the performance of his own duty, attainperfection.
PURPORTAs stated in the Fifteenth Chapter, all living beings are fragmental
parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord. As such the Supreme Lord is thebeginning of all living entities. This is confirmed in the Vedanta-sutra--janmady asya yatah. The Supreme Lord is therefore the beginningof life of every living entity. And the Supreme Lord, by His twoenergies, His external energy and internal energy, is all-pervading.Therefore one should worship the Supreme Lord with His energies.Generally the Vaisnava devotees worship the Supreme Lord with Hisinternal energy. His external energy is a perverted reflection of theinternal energy. The external energy is a background, but the SupremeLord by the expansion of His plenary portion as Paramatma is situatedeverywhere. He is the Supersoul of all demigods, all human beings, allanimals, everywhere. One should therefore know that as part and parcelof the Supreme Lord it is his duty to render service unto the Supreme.Everyone should be engaged in devotional service to the Lord in fullKrsna consciousness. That is recommended in this verse.Everyone should think that he is engaged in a particular type ofoccupation by Hrsikesa, the master of the senses. And, by the result ofthe work in which one is engaged, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,Sri Krsna, should be worshiped. If one thinks always in this way, infull Krsna consciousness, then, by the grace of the Lord, he becomesfully aware of everything. That is the perfection of life. The Lordsays in Bhagavad-gita (12.7), tesam aham samuddharta. The Supreme LordHimself takes charge of delivering such a devotee. That is the highest
perfection of life. In whatever occupation one may be engaged, if he
serves the Supreme Lord, he will achieve the highest perfection.
TEXT 47
sreyan sva-dharmo vigunah
para-dharmat sv-anusthitatsvabhava-niyatam karmakurvan napnoti kilbisam
SYNONYMSsreyan--better; sva-dharmah--one's own occupation; vigunah--imperfectly
performed; para-dharmat--another's occupation; su-anusthitat--perfectlydone; svabhava-niyatam--prescribed duties according to one's nature;karma--work; kurvan--performing; na--never; apnoti--achieve; kilbisam--sinful reactions.
TRANSLATIONIt is better to engage in one's own occupation, even though one may
perform it imperfectly, than to accept another's occupation and performit perfectly. Prescribed duties according to one's nature, are neveraffected by sinful reactions.
PURPORTOne's occupational duty is prescribed in Bhagavad-gita. As already
discussed in previous verses, the duties of a brahmana, ksatriya,vaisya and sudra are prescribed according to the particular modes ofnature. One should not imitate another's duty. A man who is by natureattracted to the kind of work done by sudras should not artificiallyclaim himself to be a brahmana, although he may have been born into abrahmana family. In this way one should work according to his ownnature; no work is abominable, if performed in the service of theSupreme Lord. The occupational duty of a brahmana is certainly in themode of goodness, but if a person is not by nature in the mode ofgoodness, he should not imitate the occupational duty of a brahmana.For a ksatriya, or administrator, there are so many abominable things;a ksatriya has to be violent to kill his enemies, and sometimes aksatriya has to tell lies for the sake of diplomacy. Such violence andduplicity accompany political affairs, but a ksatriya is not supposedto give up his occupational duty and try to perform the duties of abrahmana.One should act to satisfy the Supreme Lord. For example, Arjuna was aksatriya. He was hesitating to fight the other party. But if suchfighting is performed for the sake of Krsna, the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, there need be no fear of degradation. In the business fieldalso, sometimes a merchant has to tell so many lies to make a profit.If he does not do so, there can be no profit. Sometimes a merchantsays, "Oh, my dear customer, for you I am making no profit," but oneshould know that without profit the merchant cannot exist. Therefore itshould be taken as a simple lie if a merchant says that he is notmaking a profit. But the merchant should not think that because he isengaged in an occupation in which the telling of lies is compulsory, heshould give up his profession and pursue the profession of a brahmana.That is not recommended. Whether one is a ksatriya, a vaisya, or asudra doesn't matter, if he serves, by his work, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Even brahmanas, who perform different types of
sacrifice, sometimes must kill animals because sometimes animals aresacrificed in such ceremonies. Similarly, if a ksatriya engaged in hisown occupation kills an enemy, there is no sin incurred. In the ThirdChapter these matters have been clearly and elaborately explained;every man should work for the purpose of Yajna, or for Visnu, theSupreme Personality of Godhead. Anything done for personal sensegratification is a cause of bondage. The conclusion is that everyoneshould be engaged according to the particular mode of nature he hasacquired, and he should decide to work only to serve the supreme causeof the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 48
saha-jam karma kaunteya
sa-dosam api na tyajetsarvarambha hi dosenadhumenagnir ivavrtah
SYNONYMSsaha-jam--born simultaneously; karma--work; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
sa-dosam--with fault; api--although; na--never; tyajet--to be given up;sarva-arambhah--any venture; hi--certainly; dosena--with fault;dhumena--with smoke; agnih--fire; iva--as; avrtah--covered.
TRANSLATIONEvery endeavor is covered by some sort of fault, just as fire is
covered by smoke. Therefore one should not give up the work which isborn of his nature, O son of Kunti, even if such work is full of fault.
PURPORTIn conditioned life, all work is contaminated by the material modes of
nature. Even if one is a brahmana, he has to perform sacrifices inwhich animal killing is necessary. Similarly, a ksatriya, however pioushe may be, has to fight enemies. He cannot avoid it. Similarly, amerchant, however pious he may be, must sometimes hide his profit tostay in business, or he may sometimes have to do business on the blackmarket. These things are necessary; one cannot avoid them. Similarly,even though a man is a sudra serving a bad master, he has to carry outthe order of the master, even though it should not be done. Despitethese flaws, one should continue to carry out his prescribed duties,for they are born out of his own nature.A very nice example is given herein. Although fire is pure, still thereis smoke. Yet smoke does not make the fire impure. Even though there issmoke in the fire, fire is still considered to be the purest of allelements. If one prefers to give up the work of a ksatriya and take upthe occupation of a brahmana, he is not assured that in the occupationof a brahmana there are no unpleasant duties. One may then concludethat in the material world no one can be completely free from thecontamination of material nature. This example of fire and smoke isvery appropriate in this connection. When in wintertime one takes astone from the fire, sometimes smoke disturbs the eyes and other partsof the body, but still one must make use of the fire despite disturbingconditions. Similarly, one should not give up his natural occupationbecause there are some disturbing elements. Rather, one should be
determined to serve the Supreme Lord by his occupational duty in Krsna
consciousness. That is the perfectional point. When a particular typeof occupation is performed for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord,all the defects in that particular occupation are purified. When theresults of work are purified, when connected with devotional service,one becomes perfect in seeing the self within, and that is self-realization.
TEXT 49
asakta-buddhih sarvatra
jitatma vigata-sprhahnaiskarmya-siddhim paramamsannyasenadhigacchati
SYNONYMSasakta-buddhih--unattached intelligence; sarvatra--everywhere; jita-
atma--control of the mind; vigata-sprhah--without material desires;naiskarmya-siddhim--perfection of non-reaction; paramam--supreme;sannyasena--by the renounced order of life; adhigacchati--attains.
TRANSLATIONOne can obtain the results of renunciation simply by self-control and
by becoming unattached to material things and disregarding materialenjoyments. That is the highest perfetional stage of renunciation.
PURPORTReal renunciation means that one should always think himself part and
parcel of the Supreme Lord. Therefore he has no right to enjoy theresults of his work. Since he is part and parcel of the Supreme Lord,the results of his work must be enjoyed by the Supreme Lord. This isactually Krsna consciousness. The person acting in Krsna consciousnessis really a sannyasi, one in the renounced order of life. By such amentality, one is satisfied because he is actually acting for theSupreme. Thus he is not attached to anything material; he becomesaccustomed to not taking pleasure in anything beyond the transcendentalhappiness derived from the service of the Lord. A sannyasi is supposedto be free from the reactions of his past activities, but a person whois in Krsna consciousness automatically attains this perfection withouteven accepting the so-called order of renunciation. This state of mindis called yogarudha, or the perfectional stage of yoga, as confirmed inthe Third Chapter, yas tv atma-ratir eva syat: one who is satisfied inhimself has no fear of any kind of reaction from his activity.
TEXT 50
siddhim prapto yatha brahma
tathapnoti nibodha mesamasenaiva kaunteyanistha jnanasya ya para
SYNONYMSsiddhim--perfection; praptah--achieving; yatha--as; brahma--the
Supreme; tatha--so; apnoti--achieves; nibodha--try to understand; me--
from Me; samasena--summarily; eva--certainly; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
nistha--stage; jnanasya--of knowledge; ya--which; para--transcendental.
TRANSLATIONO son of Kunti, learn from Me in brief how one can attain to the
supreme perfectional stage, Brahman, by acting in the way I shall nowsummarize.
PURPORTThe Lord describes for Arjuna how one can achieve the highest
perfectional stage simply by being engaged in his occupational duty,performing that duty for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Oneattains the supreme stage of Brahman simply by renouncing the result ofhis work for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord. That is the processof self-realization. Actual perfection of knowledge is in attainingpure Krsna consciousness; that is described in the following verses.
TEXTS 51-53
buddhya visuddhaya yukto
dhrtyatmanam niyamya casabdadin visayams tyaktvaraga-dvesau vyudasya ca
vivikta-sevi laghv-asi
yata-vak-kaya-manasahdhyana-yoga-paro nityamvairagyam samupasritah
ahankaram balam darpam
kamam krodham parigrahamvimucya nirmamah santobrahma-bhuyaya kalpate
SYNONYMSbuddhya--by the intelligence; visuddhaya--fully purified; yuktah--such
engagement; dhrtya--determination; atmanam--self; niyamya--regulated;ca--also; sabda-adin--the sense objects, such as sound, etc.; visayan--sense objects; tyaktva--giving up; raga--attachment; dvesau--hatred;vyudasya--having laid aside; ca--also; vivikta-sevi--living in asecluded place; laghu-asi--eating a small quantity; yata-vak--controlof speech; kaya--body; manasah--control of the mind; dhyana-yoga-parah--always absorbed in trance; nityam--twenty-four hours a day; vairagyam--detachment; samupasritah--taken shelter of; ahankaram--false ego;balam--false strength; darpam--false pride; kamam--lust; krodham--anger; parigraham--acceptance of material things; vimucya--beingdelivered; nirmamah--without proprietorship; santah--peaceful; brahma-bhuyaya--to become self-realized; kalpate--is understood.
TRANSLATIONBeing purified by his intelligence and controlling the mind with
determination, giving up the objects of sense gratification, beingfreed from attachment and hatred, one who lives in a secluded place,who eats little and who controls the body and the tongue, and is always
in trance and is detached, who is without false ego, false strength,
false pride, lust, anger, and who does not accept material things, sucha person is certainly elevated to the position of self-realization.
PURPORTWhen one is purified by knowledge, he keeps himself in the mode of
goodness. Thus one becomes the controller of the mind and is always intrance. Because he is not attached to the objects of sensegratification, he does not eat more than what he requires, and hecontrols the activities of his body and mind. He has no false egobecause he does not accept the body as himself. Nor has he a desire tomake the body fat and strong by accepting so many material things.Because he has no bodily concept of life, he is not falsely proud. Heis satisfied with everything that is offered to him by the grace of theLord, and he is never angry in the absence of sense gratification. Nordoes he endeavor to acquire sense objects. Thus when he is completelyfree from false ego, he becomes nonattached to all material things, andthat is the stage of self-realization of Brahman. That stage is calledthe brahma-bhuta stage. When one is free from the material conceptionof life, he becomes peaceful and cannot be agitated. This is describedin Bhagavad-gita (2.70):
apuryamanam acala-pratistham
samudram apah pravisanti yadvattadvat kama yam pravisanti sarvesa santim apnoti na kama-kami
"A person who is not disturbed by the incessant flow of desires--that
enter like rivers into the ocean, which is ever being filled but isalways still--can alone achieve peace, and not the man who strives tosatisfy such desires."
TEXT 54
brahma-bhutah prasannatma
na socati na kanksatisamah sarvesu bhutesumad-bhaktim labhate param
SYNONYMSbrahma-bhutah--being one with the Absolute; prasanna-atma--fully
joyful; na--never; socati--laments; na--never; kanksati--desires;samah--equally disposed; sarvesu--all; bhutesu--living entities; mat-bhaktim--My devotional service; labhate--gains; param--transcendental.
TRANSLATIONOne who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme
Brahman and becomes fully joyful. He never laments or desires to haveanything. He is equally disposed to every living entity. In that statehe attains pure devotional service unto Me.
PURPORTTo the impersonalist, achieving the brahma-bhuta stage, becoming one
with the Absolute, is the last word. But for the personalist, or pure
devotee, one has to go still further to become engaged in pure
devotional service. This means that one who is engaged in puredevotional service to the Supreme Lord is already in a state ofliberation, called brahma-bhuta, oneness with the Absolute. Withoutbeing one with the Supreme, the Absolute, one cannot render serviceunto Him. In the absolute conception, there is no difference betweenthe served and the servitor; yet the distinction is there, in a higherspiritual sense.In the material concept of life, when one works for sensegratification, there is misery, but in the absolute world, when one isengaged in pure devotional service, there is no misery. The devotee inKrsna consciousness has nothing to lament or desire. Since God is full,a living entity who is engaged in God's service, in Krsnaconsciousness, becomes also full in himself. He is just like a rivercleansed of all dirty water. Because a pure devotee has no thoughtother than Krsna, he is naturally always joyful. He does not lament forany material loss or gain, because he is full in the service of theLord. He has no desire for material enjoyment because he knows thatevery living entity is a fragmental part and parcel of the Supreme Lordand therefore eternally a servant. He does not see, in the materialworld, someone as higher and someone as lower; higher and lowerpositions are ephemeral, and a devotee has nothing to do with ephemeralappearances or disappearances. For him stone and gold are of equalvalue. This is the brahma-bhuta stage, and this stage is attained veryeasily by the pure devotee. In that stage of existence, the idea ofbecoming one with the Supreme Brahman and annihilating one'sindividuality becomes hellish, and the idea of attaining the heavenlykingdom becomes phantasmagoria, and the senses are like brokenserpents' teeth. As there is no fear of a serpent with broken teeth, sothere is no fear from the senses when they are automaticallycontrolled. The world is miserable for the materially infected person,but for a devotee the entire world is as good as Vaikuntha, or thespiritual sky. The highest personality in this material universe is nomore significant than an ant for a devotee. Such a stage can beachieved by the mercy of Lord Caitanya, who preached pure devotionalservice in this age.
TEXT 55
bhaktya mam abhijanati
yavan yas casmi tattvatahtato mam tattvato jnatvavisate tad-anantaram
SYNONYMSbhaktya--by pure devotional service; mam--Me; abhijanati--one can know;
yavan--as much as; yah ca asmi--as I am; tattvatah--in truth; tatah--thereafter; mam--Me; tattvatah--by truth; jnatva--knowing; visate--enters; tat-anantaram--thereafter.
TRANSLATIONOne can understand the Supreme Personality as He is only by devotional
service. And when one is in full consciousness of the Supreme Lord bysuch devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, and His plenary portions
cannot be understood by mental speculation nor by the nondevotees. Ifanyone wants to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he hasto take to pure devotional service under the guidance of a puredevotee. Otherwise, the truth of the Supreme Personality of Godheadwill always be hidden. It is already stated in Bhagavad-gita (7.25),naham prakasah sarvasya: He is not revealed to everyone. No one canunderstand God simply by erudite scholarship or mental speculation.Only one who is actually engaged in Krsna consciousness and devotionalservice can understand what Krsna is. University degrees are nothelpful.One who is fully conversant with the Krsna science becomes eligible toenter into the spiritual kingdom, the abode of Krsna. Becoming Brahmandoes not mean that one loses his identity. Devotional service is there,and as long as devotional service exists, there must be God, thedevotee, and the process of devotional service. Such knowledge is nevervanquished, even after liberation. Liberation involves getting freefrom the concept of material life; in spiritual life the samedistinction is there, the same individuality is there, but in pureKrsna consciousness. One should not misunderstand that the word visate,"enters into Me," supports the monist theory that one becomeshomogeneous with the impersonal Brahman. No. Visate means that one canenter into the abode of the Supreme Lord in his's individuality toengage in His association and render service unto Him. For instance, agreen bird enters a green tree not to become one with the tree but toenjoy the fruits of the tree. impersonalists generally give the exampleof a river flowing into the ocean and merging. This may be a source ofhappiness for the impersonalist, but the personalist keeps his personalindividuality like an aquatic in the ocean. We find so many livingentities within the ocean, if we go deep. Surface acquaintance with theocean is not sufficient; one must have complete knowledge of theaquatics living in the ocean depths.Because of his pure devotional service, a devotee can understand thetranscendental qualities and the opulences of the Supreme Lord intruth. As it is stated in the Eleventh Chapter, only by devotionalservice can one understand. The same is confirmed here; one canunderstand the Supreme Personality of Godhead by devotional service andenter into His kingdom.After attainment of the brahma-bhuta stage of freedom from materialconceptions, devotional service begins by one's hearing about the Lord.When one hears about the Supreme Lord, automatically the brahma-bhutastage develops, and material contamination--greediness and lust forsense enjoyment--disappears. As lust and desires disappear from theheart of a devotee, he becomes more attached to the service of theLord, and by such attachment he becomes free from materialcontamination. In that state of life he can understand the SupremeLord. This is the statement of Srimad-Bhagavatam also. After liberationthe process of bhakti, or transcendental service, continues. TheVedanta-sutra (4.1.12) confirms this: a-prayanat tatrapi hi drstam.This means that after liberation the process of devotional servicecontinues. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam, real devotional liberation isdefined as the reinstatement of the living entity in his own identity,his own constitutional position. The constitutional position is alreadyexplained: every living entity is the part-and-parcel fragmentalportion of the Supreme Lord. Therefore his constitutional position isto serve. After liberation, this service is never stopped. Actualliberation is getting free from misconceptions of life.
TEXT 56
sarva-karmany api sada
kurvano mad-vyapasrayahmat-prasadad avapnotisasvatam padam avyayam
SYNONYMSsarva--all; karmani--activities; api--although; sada--always; kurvanah-
-performing; mat--under My; vyapasrayah--protection; mat--My; prasadat--mercy; avapnoti--achieves; sasvatam--eternal; padam--abode; avyayam--imperishable.
TRANSLATIONThough engaged in all kinds of activities, My devotee, under My
protection, reaches the eternal and imperishable abode by My grace.
PURPORTThe word mad-vyapasrayah means under the protection of the Supreme
Lord. To be free from material contamination, a pure devotee acts underthe direction of the Supreme Lord or His representative, the spiritualmaster. There is no time limitation for a pure devotee. He is always,twenty-four hours, one hundred percent engaged in activities under thedirection of the Supreme Lord. To a devotee who is thus engaged inKrsna consciousness the Lord is very, very kind. In spite of alldifficulties, he is eventually placed in the transcendental abode, orKrsnaloka. He is guaranteed entrance there; there is no doubt about it.In that supreme abode, there is no change; everything is eternal,imperishable and full of knowledge.
TEXT 57
cetasa sarva-karmani
mayi sannyasya mat-parahbuddhi-yogam upasrityamac-cittah satatam bhava
SYNONYMScetasa--by intelligence; sarva-karmani--all kinds of activities; mayi--
unto Me; sannyasya--giving up; mat-parah--My protection; buddhi-yogam--devotional activities; upasritya--taking shelter of; mat-cittah--consciousness; satatam--twenty-four hours a day; bhava--just become.
TRANSLATIONIn all activities just depend upon Me and work always under My
protection. In such devotional service, be fully conscious of Me.
PURPORTWhen one acts in Krsna consciousness, he does not act as the master of
the world. Just like a servant, one should act fully under thedirection of the Supreme Lord. A servant has no individual
independence. He acts only on the order of the master. A servant acting
on behalf of the supreme master has no affection for profit and loss.He simply discharges his duty faithfully in terms of the order of theLord. Now, one may argue that Arjuna was acting under the personaldirection of Krsna, but, when Krsna is not present, how should one act?If one acts according to the direction of Krsna in this book, as wellas under the guidance of the representative of Krsna, then the resultwill be the same. The Sanskrit word mat-parah is very important in thisverse. It indicates that one has no goal in life save and except actingin Krsna consciousness just to satisfy Krsna. And, while working inthat way, one should think of Krsna only: "I have been appointed todischarge this particular duty by Krsna." While acting in such a way,one naturally has to think of Krsna. This is perfect Krsnaconsciousness. One should, however, note that after doing somethingwhimsically he should not offer the result to the Supreme Lord. Thatsort of duty is not in the devotional service of Krsna consciousness.One should act according to the order of Krsna. This is a veryimportant point. That order of Krsna comes through disciplic successionfrom the bona fide spiritual master. Therefore the spiritual master'sorder should be taken as the prime duty of life. If one gets a bonafide spiritual master and acts according to his direction, then his'sperfection of life in Krsna consciousness is guaranteed.
TEXT 58
mac-cittah sarva-durgani
mat-prasadat tarisyasiatha cet tvam ahankaranna srosyasi vinanksyasi
SYNONYMSmat--My; cittah--consciousness; sarva--all; durgani--impediments; mat--
My; prasadat--My mercy; tarisyasi--you will overcome; atha--therefore;cet--if; tvam--you; ahankarat--by false ego; na--not; srosyasi--do nothear; vinanksyasi--then lose yourself.
TRANSLATIONIf you become conscious of Me, you will pass over all the obstacles of
conditional life by My grace. If, however, you do not work in suchconsciousness but act through false ego, not hearing Me, you will belost.
PURPORTA person in full Krsna consciousness is not unduly anxious to execute
the duties of his existence. The foolish cannot understand this greatfreedom from all anxiety. For one who acts in Krsna consciousness, LordKrsna becomes the most intimate friend. He always looks after Hisfriend's comfort, and He gives Himself to His friend, who is sodevotedly engaged working twenty-four hours a day to please the Lord.Therefore, no one should be carried away by the false ego of the bodilyconcept of life. One should not falsely think himself independent ofthe laws of material nature or free to act. He is already under strictmaterial laws. But, as soon as he acts in Krsna consciousness, he isliberated, free from the material perplexities. One should note verycarefully that one who is not active in Krsna consciousness is losing
himself in the material whirlpool, in the ocean of birth and death. No
conditioned soul actually knows what is to be done and what is not tobe done, but a person who acts in Krsna consciousness is free to actbecause everything is prompted by Krsna from within and confirmed bythe spiritual master.
TEXT 59
yad ahankaram asritya
na yotsya iti manyasemithyaisa vyavasayas teprakrtis tvam niyoksyati
SYNONYMSyat--therefore; ahankaram--false ego; asritya--taking shelter; na--not;
yotsye--shall fight; iti--thus; manyase--think; mithya esah--this isall false; vyavasayah te--your determination; prakrtih--materialnature; tvam--you; niyoksyati--will engage you.
TRANSLATIONIf you do not act according to My direction and do not fight, then you
will be falsely directed. By your nature, you will have to be engagedin warfare.
PURPORTArjuna was a military man, and born of the nature of the ksatriya.
Therefore his natural duty was to fight. But, due to false ego, he wasfearing that by killing his teacher, grandfather and friends, therewould be sinful reactions. Actually he was considering himself masterof his actions, as if he were directing the good and bad results ofsuch work. He forgot that the Supreme Personality of Godhead waspresent there, instructing him to fight. That is the forgetfulness ofthe conditioned soul. The Supreme Personality gives directions as towhat is good and what is bad, and one simply has to act in Krsnaconsciousness to attain the perfection of life. No one can ascertainhis destiny as the Supreme Lord can; therefore the best course is totake direction from the Supreme Lord and act. No one should neglect theorder of the Supreme Personality of Godhead or the order of thespiritual master who is the representative of God. One should actunhesitatingly to execute the order of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead--that will keep him safe under all circumstances.
TEXT 60
svabhava-jena kaunteya
nibaddhah svena karmanakartum necchasi yan mohatkarisyasy avaso 'pi tat
SYNONYMSsvabhava-jena--by one's own nature; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
nibaddhah--conditioned; svena--by one's own; karmana--activities;kartum--to do; na--not; icchasi--like; yat--that; mohat--by illusion;karisyasi--you will act; avasah--imperceptibly; api--even; tat--that.
TRANSLATION
Under illusion you are now declining to act according to My direction.
But, compelled by your own nature, you will act all the same, O son ofKunti.
PURPORTIf one refuses to act under the direction of the Supreme Lord, then he
is compelled to act by the modes in which he is situated. Everyone isunder the spell of a particular combination of the modes of nature andis acting in that way. But anyone who voluntarily engages himself underthe direction of the Supreme Lord becomes glorious.
TEXT 61
isvarah sarva-bhutanam
hrd-dese 'rjuna tisthatibhramayan sarva-bhutaniyantrarudhani mayaya
SYNONYMSisvarah--the Supreme Lord; sarva-bhutanam--of all living entities; hrt-
dese--in the location of the heart; arjuna--O Arjuna; tisthati--resides; bhramayan--causing to travel; sarva-bhutani--all livingentities; yantra--machine; arudhani--being so placed; mayaya--under thespell of material energy.
TRANSLATIONThe Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna, and is
directing the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on amachine, made of the material energy.
PURPORTArjuna was not the supreme knower, and his decision to fight or not to
fight was confined to his limited discretion. Lord Krsna instructedthat the individual is not all in all. The Supreme Personality ofGodhead, or He Himself, Krsna, the localized Supersoul, sits in theheart directing the living being. After changing bodies, the livingentity forgets his past deeds, but the Supersoul, as the knower of thepast, present and future, remains the witness of all his activities.Therefore all the activities of living entities are directed by thisSupersoul. The living entity gets what he deserves and is carried bythe material body, which is created in the material energy under thedirection of the Supersoul. As soon as a living entity is placed in aparticular type of body, he has to work under the spell of that bodilysituation. A person seated in a high-speed motorcar goes faster thanone seated in a slower car, though the living entities, the drivers,may be the same. Similarly, by the order of the Supreme Soul, materialnature fashions a particular type of body to a particular type ofliving entity to work according to his past desires. The living entityis not independent. One should not think himself independent of theSupreme Personality of Godhead. The individual is always under His
control. Therefore his duty is to surrender, and that is the injunction
of the next verse.
TEXT 62
tam eva saranam gaccha
sarva-bhavena bharatatat-prasadat param santimsthanam prapsyasi sasvatam
SYNONYMStam--unto Him; eva--certainly; saranam--surrender; gaccha--go; sarva-
bhavena--in all respects; bharata--O son of Bharata; tat-prasadat--byHis grace; param--transcendental; santim--in peace; sthanam--abode;prapsyasi--you will get; sasvatam--eternal.
TRANSLATIONO scion of Bharata, surrender unto Him utterly. By His grace you will
attain transcendental peace and the supreme and eternal abode.
PURPORTA living entity should therefore surrender unto the Supreme Personality
of Godhead who is situated in everyone's heart, and that will relievehim from all kinds of miseries of this material existence. By suchsurrender, one will not only be released from all miseries in thislife, but at the end he will reach the Supreme God. The transcendentalworld is described in the Vedic literature (Rg Veda 1.22.20) as tadvisnoh paramam padam. Since all of creation is the kingdom of God,everything material is actually spiritual, but paramam padamspecifically refers to the eternal abode, which is called the spiritualsky or Vaikuntha.In the Fifteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gita it is stated, sarvasya cahamhrdi sannivistah: the Lord is seated in everyone's heart, so thisrecommendation that one should surrender unto the Supersoul sittingwithin means that one should surrender unto the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, Krsna. Krsna has already been accepted by Arjuna as theSupreme. He was accepted in the Tenth Chapter as param brahma paramdhama. Arjuna has accepted Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godheadand the supreme abode of all living entities, not only because of hispersonal experience but also because of the evidence of greatauthorities like Narada, Asita, Devala and Vyasa.
TEXT 63
iti te jnanam akhyatam
guhyad guhyataram mayavimrsyaitad asesenayathecchasi tatha kuru
SYNONYMSiti--thus; te--unto you; jnanam--knowledge; akhyatam--described;
guhyat--confidential; guhya-taram--still more confidential; maya--byMe; vimrsya--by deliberation; etat--that; asesena--fully; yatha--asyou; icchasi--you like; tatha--that; kuru--perform.
TRANSLATION
Thus I have explained to you the most confidential of all knowledge.
Deliberate on this fully, and then do what you wish to do.
PURPORTThe Lord has already explained to Arjuna the knowledge of brahma-bhuta.
One who is in the brahma-bhuta condition is joyful; he never laments,nor does he desire anything. That is due to confidential knowledge.Krsna also discloses knowledge of the Supersoul. This is also Brahmanknowledge, knowledge of Brahman, but it is superior.Here Lord Krsna tells Arjuna that he can do as he chooses. God does notinterfere with the little independence of the living entity. InBhagavad-gita, the Lord has explained in all respects how one canelevate his living condition. The best advice imparted to Arjuna is tosurrender unto the Supersoul seated within his heart. By rightdiscrimination, one should agree to act according to the order of theSupersoul. That will help one become situated constantly in Krsnaconsciousness, the highest perfectional stage of human life. Arjuna isbeing directly ordered by the Personality of Godhead to fight.Surrender to the Supreme Personality of Godhead is in the best interestof the living entities. It is not for the interest of the Supreme.Before surrendering, one is free to deliberate on this subject as faras the intelligence goes; that is the best way to accept theinstruction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such instructioncomes also through the spiritual master, the bona fide representativeof Krsna.
TEXT 64
sarva-guhyatamam bhuyah
srnu me paramam vacahisto 'si me drdham ititato vaksyami te hitam
SYNONYMSsarva-guhya-tamam--the most confidential of all; bhuyah--again; srnu--
just hear; me--from Me; paramam--the supreme; vacah--instruction; istahasi--you are very dear to Me; me--of Me; drdham--very; iti--thus;tatah--therefore; vaksyami--I am speaking; te--for your; hitam--benefit.
TRANSLATIONBecause you are My very dear friend, I am speaking to you My supreme
instruction, the most confidential knowledge of all. Hear this from Me,for it is for your benefit.
PURPORTThe Lord has given Arjuna confidential knowledge of the Supersoul
within everyone's heart, and now He is giving the most confidentialpart of this knowledge: just surrender unto the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. At the end of the Ninth Chapter He has said, man-manah: "Justalways think of Me." The same instruction is repeated here to stress
the essence of the teachings of Bhagavad-gita. This essence is not
understood by a common man, but by one who is actually very dear toKrsna, a pure devotee of Krsna. This is the most important instructionin all Vedic literature. What Krsna is saying in this connection is themost essential part of knowledge, and it should be carried out not onlyby Arjuna but by all living entities.
TEXT 65
man-mana bhava mad-bhakto
mad-yaji mam namaskurumam evaisyasi satyam tepratijane priyo 'si me
SYNONYMSmat-manah--thinking of Me; bhava--just become; mat-bhaktah--My devotee;
mat-yaji--My worshiper; mam--unto Me; namaskuru--offer your obeisances;mam--unto Me; eva--certainly; esyasi--come; satyam--truly; te--to you;pratijane--I promise; priyah--dear; asi--you are; me--Mine.
TRANSLATIONAlways think of Me and become My devotee. Worship Me and offer your
homage unto Me. Thus you will come to Me without fail. I promise youthis because you are My very dear friend.
PURPORTThe most confidential part of knowledge is that one should become a
pure devotee of Krsna and always think of Him and act for Him. Oneshould not become an official meditator. Life should be so molded thatone will always have the chance to think of Krsna. One should alwaysact in such a way that all his daily activities are in connection withKrsna. He should arrange his life in such a way that throughout thetwenty-four hours he cannot but think of Krsna. And the Lord's promiseis that anyone who is in such pure Krsna consciousness will certainlyreturn to the abode of Krsna, where he will be engaged in theassociation of Krsna face to face. This most confidential part ofknowledge is spoken to Arjuna because he is the dear friend of Krsna.Everyone who follows the path of Arjuna can become a dear friend toKrsna and obtain the same perfection as Arjuna.These words stress that one should concentrate his mind upon Krsna--thevery form with two hands carrying a flute, the bluish boy with abeautiful face and peacock feathers in His hair. There are descriptionsof Krsna found in the Brahma-samhita and other literatures. One shouldfix his mind on this original form of Godhead, Krsna. He should noteven divert his attention to other forms of the Lord. The Lord hasmultiforms as Visnu, Narayana, Rama, Varaha, etc., but a devotee shouldconcentrate his mind on the form that was present before Arjuna.Concentration of the mind on the form of Krsna constitutes the mostconfidential part of knowledge, and this is disclosed to Arjuna becauseArjuna is the most dear friend of Krsna's.
TEXT 66
sarva-dharman parityajya
mam ekam saranam vraja
aham tvam sarva-papebhyo
moksayisyami ma sucah
SYNONYMSsarva-dharman--all varieties of religion; parityajya--abandoning; mam--
unto Me; ekam--only; saranam--surrender; vraja--go; aham--I; tvam--you;sarva--all; papebhyah--from sinful reactions; moksayisyami--deliver;ma--not; sucah--worry.
TRANSLATIONAbandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall
deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear.
PURPORTThe Lord has described various kinds of knowledge, processes of
religion, knowledge of the Supreme Brahman, knowledge of the Supersoul,knowledge of the different types of orders and statuses of social life,knowledge of the renounced order of life, knowledge of nonattachment,sense and mind control, meditation, etc. He has described in so manyways different types of religion. Now, in summarizing Bhagavad-gita,the Lord says that Arjuna should give up all the processes that havebeen explained to him; he should simply surrender to Krsna. Thatsurrender will save him from all kinds of sinful reactions, for theLord personally promises to protect him.In the Seventh Chapter it was said that only one who has become freefrom all sinful reactions can take to the worship of Lord Krsna. Thusone may think that unless he is free from all sinful reactions hecannot take to the surrendering process. To such doubts it is here saidthat even if one is not free from all sinful reactions, simply by theprocess of surrendering to Sri Krsna he is automatically freed. Thereis no need of strenuous effort to free oneself from sinful reactions.One should unhesitatingly accept Krsna as the supreme savior of allliving entities. With faith and love, one should surrender unto Him.According to the devotional process, one should simply accept suchreligious principles that will lead ultimately to the devotionalservice of the Lord. One may perform a particular occupational dutyaccording to his position in the social order, but if by executing hisduty one does not come to the point of Krsna consciousness, all hisactivities are in vain. Anything that does not lead to the perfectionalstage of Krsna consciousness should be avoided. One should be confidentthat in all circumstances Krsna will protect him from all difficulties.There is no need of thinking how one should keep the body and soultogether. Krsna will see to that. One should always think himselfhelpless and should consider Krsna the only basis for his progress inlife. As soon as one seriously engages himself in devotional service tothe Lord in full Krsna consciousness, at once he becomes freed from allcontamination of material nature. There are different processes ofreligion and purificatory processes by cultivation of knowledge,meditation in the mystic yoga system, etc., but one who surrenders untoKrsna does not have to execute so many methods. That simple surrenderunto Krsna will save him from unnecessarily wasting time. One can thusmake all progress at once and be freed from all sinful reaction.One should be attracted by the beautiful vision of Krsna. His name isKrsna because He is all-attractive. One who becomes attracted by thebeautiful, all-powerful, omnipotent vision of Krsna is fortunate. There
are different kinds of transcendentalists--some of them are attached to
the impersonal Brahman vision, some of them are attracted by theSupersoul feature, etc., but one who is attracted to the personalfeature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and, above all, one whois attracted by the Supreme Personality of Godhead as Krsna Himself, isthe most perfect transcendentalist. In other words, devotional serviceto Krsna, in full consciousness, is the most confidential part ofknowledge, and this is the essence of the whole Bhagavad-gita. Karma-yogis, empiric philosophers, mystics, and devotees are all calledtranscendentalists, but one who is a pure devotee is the best of all.The particular words used here, ma sucah, "Don't fear, don't hesitate,don't worry," are very significant. One may be perplexed as to how onecan give up all kinds of religious forms and simply surrender untoKrsna, but such worry is useless.
TEXT 67
idam te natapaskaya
nabhaktaya kadacanana casusrusave vacyamna ca mam yo 'bhyasuyati
SYNONYMSidam--this; te--you; na--never; atapaskaya--one who is not austere; na-
-never; abhaktaya--one who is not a devotee; kadacana--at any time; na--never; ca--also; asusrusave--one who is not engaged in devotionalservice; vacyam--to be spoken; na--never; ca--also; mam--unto Me; yah--anyone; abhyasuyati--envious.
TRANSLATIONThis confidential knowledge may not be explained to those who are not
austere, or devoted, or engaged in devotional service, nor to one whois envious of Me.
PURPORTPersons who have not undergone the austerities of the religious
process, who have never attempted devotional service in Krsnaconsciousness, who have not tended a pure devotee, and especially thosewho are conscious of Krsna as a historical personality or who areenvious of the greatness of Krsna, should not be told this mostconfidential part of knowledge. It is, however, sometimes found thateven demoniac persons who are envious of Krsna, worshiping Krsna in adifferent way, take to the profession of explaining Bhagavad-gita in adifferent way to make business, but anyone who desires actually tounderstand Krsna must avoid such commentaries on Bhagavad-gita.Actually the purpose of Bhagavad-gita is not understandable to thosewho are sensuous--even if one is not sensuous but is strictly followingthe disciplines enjoined in the Vedic scripture, if he is not adevotee, he also cannot understand Krsna. Even when one poses himselfas a devotee of Krsna, but is not engaged in Krsna consciousactivities, he also cannot understand Krsna. There are many persons whoenvy Krsna because He has explained in Bhagavad-gita that He is theSupreme and that nothing is above Him or equal to Him. There are manypersons who are envious of Krsna. Such persons should not be told ofBhagavad-gita, for they cannot understand. There is no possibility of
faithless persons' understanding Bhagavad-gita and Krsna. Without
understanding Krsna from the authority of a pure devotee, one shouldnot try to comment upon Bhagavad-gita.
TEXT 68
ya idam paramam guhyam
mad-bhaktesv abhidhasyatibhaktim mayi param krtvamam evaisyaty asamsayah
SYNONYMSyah--anyone; idam--this; paramam--most; guhyam--confidential; mat--
Mine; bhaktesu--amongst devotees of; abhidhasyati--explains; bhaktim--devotional service; mayi--unto Me; param--transcendental; krtva--havingdone; mam--unto Me; eva--certainly; esyati--comes; asamsayah--withoutdoubt.
TRANSLATIONFor one who explains the supreme secret to the devotees, devotional
service is guaranteed, and at the end he will come back to Me.
PURPORTGenerally it is advised that Bhagavad-gita be discussed amongst the
devotees only, for those who are not devotees will neither understandKrsna nor Bhagavad-gita. Those who do not accept Krsna as He is andBhagavad-gita as it is should not try to explain Bhagavad-gitawhimsically and become offenders. Bhagavad-gita should be explained topersons who are ready to accept Krsna as the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. It is a subject matter for the devotees only and not forphilosophical speculators. Anyone, however, who tries sincerely topresent Bhagavad-gita as it is will advance in devotional activitiesand reach the pure devotional state of life. As a result of such puredevotion, he is sure to go back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 69
na ca tasman manusyesu
kascin me priya-krttamahbhavita na ca me tasmadanyah priyataro bhuvi
SYNONYMSna--never; ca--and; tasmat--therefore; manusyesu--among mankind;
kascit--anyone; me--My; priya-krt-tamah--more dear; bhavita--willbecome; na--nor; ca--and; me--My; tasmat--than him; anyah--other;priya-tarah--dearer; bhuvi--in this world.
TRANSLATIONThere is no servant in this world more dear to Me than he, nor will
there ever be one more dear.
TEXT 70
adhyesyate ca ya imam
dharmyam samvadam avayohjnana-yajnena tenahamistah syam iti me matih
SYNONYMSadhyesyate--will study; ca--also; yah--he; imam--this; dharmyam--
sacred; samvadam--conversation; avayoh--of ours; jnana--knowledge;yajnena--by sacrifice; tena--by him; aham--I; istah--worshiped; syam--shall be; iti--thus; me--My; matih--opinion.
TRANSLATIONAnd I declare that he who studies this sacred conversation worships Me
by his intelligence.
TEXT 71
sraddhavan anasuyas ca
srnuyad api yo narahso 'pi muktah subhal lokanprapnuyat punya-karmanam
SYNONYMSsraddha-van--faithful; anasuyah ca--and not envious; srnuyat--does
hear; api--certainly; yah--who; narah--a man; sah--he; api--also;muktah--being liberated; subhan--auspicious; lokan--planets; prapnuyat--attains; punya-karmanam--of the pious.
TRANSLATIONAnd one who listens with faith and without envy becomes free from
sinful reactions and attains to the planets where the pious dwell.
PURPORTIn the 67th verse of this chapter, the Lord explicitly forbade the
Gita's being spoken to those who are envious of the Lord. In otherwords, Bhagavad-gita is for the devotees only. But it so happens thatsometimes a devotee of the Lord will hold open class, and in that classall the students are not expected to be devotees. Why do such personshold open class? It is explained here that although everyone is not adevotee, still there are many men who are not envious of Krsna. Theyhave faith in Him as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If suchpersons hear from a bona fide devotee about the Lord, the result isthat they become at once free from all sinful reactions and after thatattain to the planetary system where all righteous persons aresituated. Therefore simply by hearing Bhagavad-gita, even a person whodoes not try to be a pure devotee attains the result of righteousactivities. Thus a pure devotee of the Lord gives everyone a chance tobecome free from all sinful reactions and to become a devotee of theLord.Generally those who are free from sinful reactions, those who arerighteous, very easily take to Krsna consciousness. The word punya-karmanam is very significant here. This refers to the performance of
great sacrifices. Those who are righteous in performing devotional
service but who are not pure can attain the planetary system of thepolestar, or Dhruvaloka, where Dhruva Maharaja is presiding. He is agreat devotee of the Lord, and he has a special planet which is calledthe polestar.
TEXT 72
kaccid etac chrutam partha
tvayaikagrena cetasakaccid ajnana-sammohahpranastas te dhananjaya
SYNONYMSkaccit--whether; etat--this; srutam--heard; partha--O son of Prtha;
tvaya--by you; eka-agrena--with full attention; cetasa--by the mind;kaccit--whether; ajnana--ignorant; sammohah--illusion; pranastah--dispelled; te--of you; dhananjaya--O conqueror of wealth (Arjuna).
TRANSLATIONO conqueror of wealth, Arjuna, have you heard this attentively with
your mind? And are your illusions and ignorance now dispelled?
PURPORTThe Lord was acting as the spiritual master of Arjuna. Therefore it was
His duty to inquire from Arjuna whether he understood the wholeBhagavad-gita in its proper perspective. If not, the Lord was ready tore-explain any point, or the whole Bhagavad-gita if so required.Actually, anyone who hears Bhagavad-gita from a bona fide spiritualmaster like Krsna or His representative will find that all hisignorance is dispelled. Bhagavad-gita is not an ordinary book writtenby a poet or fiction writer; it is spoken by the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. Any person, if he is fortunate enough to hear these teachingsfrom Krsna or from His bona fide spiritual representative, is sure tobecome a liberated person and get out of the darkness of ignorance.
TEXT 73
arjuna uvaca
nasto mohah smrtir labdhatvat-prasadan mayacyutasthito 'smi gata-sandehahkarisye vacanam tava
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; nastah--dispelled; mohah--illusion; smrtih-
-memory; labdha--regained; tvat-prasadat--by Your mercy; maya--by me;acyuta--O infallible Krsna; sthitah--situated; asmi--I am; gata--removed; sandehah--all doubts; karisye--I shall execute; vacanam--order; tava--Your.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: My dear Krsna, O infallible one, my illusion is now gone.
I have regained my memory by Your mercy, and I am now firm and freefrom doubt and am prepared to act according to Your instructions.
PURPORTThe constitutional position of a living entity, represented by Arjuna,
is that he has to act according to the order of the Supreme Lord. He ismeant for self-discipline. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu says that the actualposition of the living entity is that of eternal servant of the SupremeLord. Forgetting this principle, the living entity becomes conditionedby material nature, but in serving the Supreme Lord, he becomes theliberated servant of God. The living entity's constitutional positionis to be a servitor; he has to serve either the illusory maya or theSupreme Lord. If he serves the Supreme Lord, he is in his normalcondition, but if he prefers to serve the illusory external energy,then certainly he will be in bondage. In illusion the living entity isserving in this material world. He is bound by his lust and desires,yet he thinks of himself as the master of the world. This is calledillusion. When a person is liberated, his illusion is over, and hevoluntarily surrenders unto the Supreme to act according to Hisdesires. The last illusion, the last snare of maya to trap the livingentity, is the proposition that he is God. The living entity thinksthat he is no longer a conditioned soul, but God. He is sounintelligent that he does not think that if he were God, then howcould he be in doubt? That he does not consider. So that is the lastsnare of illusion. Actually to become free from the illusory energy isto understand Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and agree toact according to His order.The word moha is very important in this verse. Moha refers to thatwhich is opposed to knowledge. Actually real knowledge is theunderstanding that every living being is eternally a servitor of theLord, but instead of thinking oneself in that position, the livingentity thinks that he is not a servant, that he is the master of thismaterial world, for he wants to lord it over the material nature. Thatis his illusion. This illusion can be overcome by the mercy of the Lordor by the mercy of a pure devotee. When that illusion is over, oneagrees to act in Krsna consciousness.Krsna consciousness is acting according to Krsna's order. A conditionedsoul illusioned by the external energy of matter does not know that theSupreme Lord is the master who is full of knowledge and who is theproprietor of everything. Whatever He desires He can bestow upon Hisdevotees; He is the friend of everyone, and He is especially inclinedto His devotee. He is the controller of this material nature and of allliving entities. He is also the controller of inexhaustible time, andHe is full of all opulences and potencies. The Supreme Personality ofGodhead can even give Himself to the devotee. One who does not know Himis under the spell of illusion; he does not become a devotee, but aservitor of maya. Arjuna, however, after hearing Bhagavad-gita from theSupreme Personality of Godhead, became free from all illusion. He couldunderstand that Krsna was not only his friend, but the SupremePersonality of Godhead. And he understood Krsna factually. So to studyBhagavad-gita is to understand Krsna factually. When a person is infull knowledge, he naturally surrenders to Krsna. When Arjunaunderstood that it was Krsna's plan to reduce the unnecessary increaseof population, he agreed to fight according to Krsna's desire. He againtook up his weapons--his arrows and bow--to fight under the order ofthe Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 74
sanjaya uvaca
ity aham vasudevasyaparthasya ca mahatmanahsamvadam imam asrausamadbhutam roma-harsanam
SYNONYMSsanjayah uvaca--Sanjaya said; iti--thus; aham--I; vasudevasya--of
Krsna; parthasya--of Arjuna; ca--also; maha-atmanah--two great souls;samvadam--discussing; imam--this; asrausam--heard; adbhutam--wonder;roma-harsanam--hair standing on end.
TRANSLATIONSanjaya said: Thus have I heard the conversation of two great souls,
Krsna and Arjuna. And so wonderful is that message that my hair isstanding on end.
PURPORTIn the beginning of Bhagavad-gita, Dhrtarastra inquired from his
secretary Sanjaya, "What happened in the Battlefield of Kuruksetra?"The entire study was related to the heart of Sanjaya by the grace ofhis spiritual master, Vyasa. He thus explained the theme of thebattlefield. The conversation was wonderful because such an importantconversation between two great souls never took place before and wouldnot take place again. It is wonderful because the Supreme Personalityof Godhead is speaking about Himself and His energies to the livingentity, Arjuna, a great devotee of the Lord. If we follow in thefootsteps of Arjuna to understand Krsna, then our life will be happyand successful. Sanjaya realized this, and as he began to understandit, he related the conversation to Dhrtarastra. Now it is concludedthat wherever there is Krsna and Arjuna, there is victory.
TEXT 75
vyasa-prasadac chrutavan
etad guhyam aham paramyogam yogesvarat krsnatsaksat kathayatah svayam
SYNONYMSvyasa-prasadat--by the mercy of Vyasadeva; srutavan--heard; etat--this;
guhyam--confidential; aham--I; param--the supreme; yogam--mysticism;yoga-isvarat--from the master of all mysticism; krsnat--from Krsna;saksat--directly; kathayatah--speaking; svayam--personally.
TRANSLATIONBy the mercy of Vyasa, I have heard these most confidential talks
directly from the master of all mysticism, Krsna, who was speakingpersonally to Arjuna.
PURPORT
Vyasa was the spiritual master of Sanjaya, and Sanjaya admits that it
was by his mercy that he could understand the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. This means that one has to understand Krsna not directly butthrough the medium of the spiritual master. The spiritual master is thetransparent medium, although it is true that the experience is direct.This is the mystery of the disciplic succession. When the spiritualmaster is bona fide, then one can hear Bhagavad-gita directly, asArjuna heard it. There are many mystics and yogis all over the world,but Krsna is the master of all yoga systems. Krsna's instruction isexplicitly stated in Bhagavad-gita--surrender unto Krsna. One who doesso is the topmost yogi. This is confirmed in the last verse of theSixth Chapter. Yoginam api sarvesam.Narada is the direct disciple of Krsna and the spiritual master ofVyasa. Therefore Vyasa is as bona fide as Arjuna because he comes inthe disciplic succession, and Sanjaya is the direct disciple of Vyasa.Therefore by the grace of Vyasa, his senses were purified, and he couldsee and hear Krsna directly. One who directly hears Krsna canunderstand this confidential knowledge. If one does not come to thedisciplic succession, he cannot hear Krsna; therefore his knowledge isalways imperfect, at least as far as understanding Bhagavad-gita isconcerned.In Bhagavad-gita, all the yoga systems, karma-yoga, jnana-yoga andbhakti-yoga, are explained. Krsna is the master of all such mysticism.It is to be understood, however, that as Arjuna was fortunate enough tounderstand Krsna directly, similarly, by the grace of Vyasa, Sanjayawas also able to hear Krsna directly. Actually there is no differencebetween hearing directly from Krsna and hearing directly from Krsna viaa bona fide spiritual master like Vyasa. The spiritual master is therepresentative of Vyasadeva also. According to the Vedic system, on thebirthday of the spiritual master, the disciples conduct the ceremonycalled Vyasa-puja.
TEXT 76
rajan samsmrtya samsmrtya
samvadam imam adbhutamkesavarjunayoh punyamhrsyami ca muhur muhuh
SYNONYMSrajan--O King; samsmrtya--remembering; samsmrtya--remembering;
samvadam--message; imam--this; adbhutam--wonderful; kesava--Lord Krsna;arjunayoh--and Arjuna; punyam--pious; hrsyami--taking pleasure; ca--also; muhuh muhuh--always, repeatedly.
TRANSLATIONO King, as I repeatedly recall this wondrous and holy dialogue between
Krsna and Arjuna, I take pleasure, being thrilled at every moment.
PURPORTThe understanding of Bhagavad-gita is so transcendental that anyone who
becomes conversant with the topics of Arjuna and Krsna becomesrighteous, and he cannot forget such talks. This is the transcendental
position of spiritual life. In other words, one who hears the Gita from
the right source, directly from Krsna, attains full Krsnaconsciousness. The result of Krsna consciousness is that one becomesincreasingly enlightened, and he enjoys life with a thrill, not onlyfor some time, but at every moment.
TEXT 77
tac ca samsmrtya samsmrtya
rupam aty-adbhutam harehvismayo me mahan rajanhrsyami ca punah punah
SYNONYMStat--that; ca--also; samsmrtya--remembering; samsmrtya--remembering;
rupam--form; ati--great; adbhutam--wonderful; hareh--of Lord Krsna;vismayah--wonder; me--my; mahan--great; rajan--O King; hrsyami--enjoying; ca--also; punah punah--repeatedly.
TRANSLATIONO King, when I remember the wonderful form of Lord Krsna, I am struck
with even greater wonder, and I rejoice again and again.
PURPORTIt appears that Sanjaya also, by the grace of Vyasa, could see the
universal form Krsna exhibited to Arjuna. It is, of course, said thatLord Krsna had never exhibited such a form before. It was exhibited toArjuna only, yet some great devotees could also see the universal formof Krsna when it was shown to Arjuna, and Vyasa was one of them. He isone of the great devotees of the Lord, and he is considered to be apowerful incarnation of Krsna. Vyasa disclosed this to his discipleSanjaya, who remembered that wonderful form of Krsna exhibited toArjuna and enjoyed it repeatedly.
yatra yogesvarah krsno
yatra partho dhanur-dharahtatra srir vijayo bhutirdhruva nitir matir mama
SYNONYMSyatra--where; yoga-isvarah--the master of mysticism; krsnah--Lord
Krsna; yatra--where; parthah--the son of Prtha; dhanuh-dharah--thecarrier of the bow and arrow; tatra--there; srih--opulence; vijayah--victory; bhutih--exceptional power; dhruva--certain; nitih--morality;matih mama--is my opinion.
TRANSLATIONWherever there is Krsna, the master of all mystics, and wherever there
is Arjuna, the supreme archer, there will also certainly be opulence,victory, extraordinary power, and morality. That is my opinion.
PURPORT
The Bhagavad-gita began with an inquiry of Dhrtarastra. He was hopeful
of the victory of his sons, assisted by great warriors like Bhisma,Drona and Karna. He was hopeful that the victory would be on his side.But, after describing the scene on the battlefield, Sanjaya told theKing, "You are thinking of victory, but my opinion is that where Krsnaand Arjuna are present, there will be all good fortune." He directlyconfirmed that Dhrtarastra could not expect victory for his side.Victory was certain for the side of Arjuna because Krsna was there.Krsna's acceptance of the post of charioteer for Arjuna was anexhibition of another opulence. Krsna is full of all opulences, andrenunciation is one of them. There are many instances of suchrenunciation, for Krsna is also the master of renunciation.The fight was actually between Duryodhana and Yudhisthira. Arjuna wasfighting on behalf of his elder brother, Yudhisthira. Because Krsna andArjuna were on the side of Yudhisthira, Yudhisthira's victory wascertain. The battle was to decide who would rule the world, and Sanjayapredicted that the power would be transferred to Yudhisthira. It isalso predicted here that Yudhisthira, after gaining victory in thisbattle, would flourish more and more because he was not only righteousand pious, but he was a strict moralist. He never spoke a lie duringhis life.There are many less intelligent persons who take Bhagavad-gita to be adiscussion of topics between two friends in a battlefield. But such abook cannot be scripture. Some may protest that Krsna incited Arjuna tofight, which is immoral, but the reality of the situation is clearlystated: Bhagavad-gita is the supreme instruction in morality. Thesupreme instruction of morality is stated in the Ninth Chapter, in thethirty-fourth verse: man-mana bhava mad-bhaktah. One must become adevotee of Krsna, and the essence of all religion is to surrender untoKrsna, as stated, Sarva-dharman. The instructions of Bhagavad-gitaconstitute the supreme process of religion and of morality. All otherprocesses may be purifying and may lead to this process, but the lastinstruction of the Gita is the last word in all morality and religion:surrender unto Krsna. This is the verdict of the Eighteenth Chapter.From Bhagavad-gita we can understand that to realize oneself byphilosophical speculation and by meditation is one process, but tofully surrender unto Krsna is the highest perfection. This is theessence of the teachings of Bhagavad-gita. The path of regulativeprinciples according to the orders of social life and according to thedifferent courses of religion may be a confidential path of knowledgein as far as the rituals of religion are confidential, but one is stillinvolved with meditation and cultivation of knowledge. Surrender untoKrsna in devotional service in full Krsna consciousness is the mostconfidential instruction and is the essence of the Eighteenth Chapter.Another feature of Bhagavad-gita is that the actual truth is theSupreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. Absolute Truth is realized inthree features--impersonal Brahman, localized Paramatma, and theSupreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. Perfect knowledge of theAbsolute Truth means perfect knowledge of Krsna. If one understandsKrsna, then all the departments of knowledge are part and parcel ofthat understanding. Krsna is transcendental, for He is always situatedin His eternal internal potency. The living entities are manifested andare divided into two classes, eternally conditioned and eternallyliberated. Such living entities are innumerable, and they areconsidered fundamental parts of Krsna. Material energy is manifestedinto twenty-four divisions. The creation is effected by eternal time,and it is created and dissolved by external energy. This manifestationof the cosmic world repeatedly becomes visible and invisible.
In Bhagavad-gita five principal subject matters have been discussed:
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, material nature, the livingentities, eternal time and all kinds of activities. All of these aredependent on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. All conceptionsof the Absolute Truth, namely, impersonal Brahman, localized Paramatma,or any other transcendental conception, exist within the category ofunderstanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Althoughsuperficially the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the living entity,material nature and time appear to be different, nothing is differentfrom the Supreme. But the Supreme is always different from everything.Lord Caitanya's philosophy is that of "inconceivably one anddifferent." This system of philosophy constitutes perfect knowledge ofthe Absolute Truth.The living entity in his original position is pure spirit. He is justlike an atomic particle of the Supreme Spirit. The conditioned livingentity, however, is the marginal energy of the Lord; he tends to be incontact with both the material energy and the spiritual energy. Inother words, the living entity is situated between the two energies ofthe Lord, and because he belongs to the superior energy of the Lord, hehas a particle of independence. By proper use of that independence hecomes under the direct order of Krsna. Thus he attains his normalcondition in the pleasure-giving potency.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Eighteenth Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of its Conclusion--the Perfection ofRenunciation.
Bhagavad-gita As It Is  by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of
this book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended forpersonal non-commercial use only, under the fair use guidelinesestablished by international copyright laws. You may use thiselectronic file to evaluate the printed version of this book, for yourown private use, or for short excerpts used in academic works,research, student papers, presentations, and the like. You candistribute this evaluation copy to others over the Internet, so long asyou keep this copyright information intact. You may not reproduce morethan ten percent (10%) of this book in any media without the expresswritten permission from the copyright holders. Reference any excerptsin the following way: Excerpted from Bhagavad-gita As It Is by A.C.Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta BookTrust International, www.Krishna.com .
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1972-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or toevaluate dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website ofthe publishers, www.Krishna.com .
