God consciousness. Of course, it would be superficial to understand
that he was killed. Similarly, in India also there are many examples,such as Thakura Haridasa and Prahlada Maharaja. Why such risk? Becausethey wanted to spread Krsna consciousness, and it is difficult. A Krsnaconscious person knows that if a man is suffering, it is due to hisforgetfulness of his eternal relationship with Krsna. Therefore, thehighest benefit one can render to human society is relieving one'sneighbor from all material problems. In such a way, a pure devotee isengaged in the service of the Lord. Now, we can imagine how mercifulKrsna is to those engaged in His service, risking everything for Him.Therefore it is certain that such persons must reach the supreme planetafter leaving the body.In summary, the universal form of Krsna, which is a temporarymanifestation, and the form of time which devours everything, and eventhe form of Visnu, four-handed, have all been exhibited by Krsna. ThusKrsna is the origin of all these manifestations. It is not that Krsnais a manifestation of the original visva-rupa, or Visnu. Krsna is theorigin of all forms. There are hundreds and thousands of Visnus, butfor a devotee, no form of Krsna is important but the original form,two-handed Syamasundara. In the Brahma-samhita it is stated that thosewho are attached to the Syamasundara form of Krsna in love and devotioncan see Him always within the heart and cannot see anything else. Oneshould understand, therefore, that the purport of this Eleventh Chapteris that the form of Krsna is essential and supreme.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Eleventh Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of the Universal Form.
Chapter 12
Devotional Service
TEXT 1
arjuna uvaca
evam satata-yukta yebhaktas tvam paryupasateye capy aksaram avyaktamtesam ke yoga-vittamah
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; evam--thus; satata--always; yuktah--
engaged; ye--those; bhaktah--devotees; tvam--unto You; paryupasate--properly worship; ye--those; ca--also; api--again; aksaram--beyond thesenses; avyaktam--unmanifested; tesam--of them; ke--who; yoga-vit-tamah--the most perfect.
TRANSLATIONArjuna inquired: What is considered to be more perfect, those who are
properly engaged in Your devotional service, or those who worship theimpersonal Brahman, the unmanifested?
PURPORTKrsna has now explained about the personal, the impersonal and the
universal and has described all kinds of devotees and yogis. Generally,the transcendentalists can be divided into two classes. One is the
impersonalist, and the other is the personalist. The personalist
devotee engages himself with all energy in the service of the SupremeLord. The impersonalist engages himself not directly in the service ofKrsna but in meditation on the impersonal Brahman, the unmanifested.We find in this chapter that of the different processes for realizationof the Absolute Truth, bhakti-yoga, devotional service, is the highest.If one at all desires to have the association of the SupremePersonality of Godhead, then he must take to devotional service.Those who worship the Supreme Lord directly by devotional service arecalled personalists. Those who engage themselves in meditation on theimpersonal Brahman are called impersonalists. Arjuna is herequestioning which position is better. There are different ways torealize the Absolute Truth, but Krsna indicates in this chapter thatbhakti-yoga, or devotional service to Him, is highest of all. It is themost direct, and it is the easiest means for association with theGodhead.In the Second Chapter the Lord explains that a living entity is not thematerial body but is a spiritual spark, a part of the Absolute Truth.In the Seventh Chapter He speaks of the living entity as part andparcel of the supreme whole and recommends that he transfer hisattention fully to the whole. In the Eighth Chapter it is stated thatwhoever thinks of Krsna at the moment of death is at once transferredto the spiritual sky, Krsna's abode. And at the end of the SixthChapter the Lord says that out of all the yogis, he who thinks of Krsnawithin himself is considered to be the most perfect. So throughout theGita personal devotion to Krsna is recommended as the highest form ofspiritual realization. Yet there are those who are still attracted toKrsna's impersonal brahmajyoti effulgence, which is the all-pervasiveaspect of the Absolute Truth and which is unmanifest and beyond thereach of the senses. Arjuna would like to know which of these two typesof transcendentalists is more perfect in knowledge. In other words, heis clarifying his own position because he is attached to the personalform of Krsna. He is not attached to the impersonal Brahman. He wantsto know whether his position is secure. The impersonal manifestation,either in this material world or in the spiritual world of the SupremeLord, is a problem for meditation. Actually one cannot perfectlyconceive of the impersonal feature of the Absolute Truth. ThereforeArjuna wants to say, "What is the use of such a waste of time?" Arjunaexperienced in the Eleventh Chapter that to be attached to the personalform of Krsna is best because he could thus understand all other formsat the same time and there was no disturbance to his love for Krsna.This important question asked of Krsna by Arjuna will clarify thedistinction between the impersonal and personal conceptions of theAbsolute Truth.
TEXT 2
sri-bhagavan uvaca
mayy avesya mano ye mamnitya-yukta upasatesraddhaya parayopetaste me yuktatama matah
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; mayi--unto
Me; avesya--fixing; manah--mind; ye--one who; mam--unto Me; nitya--always; yuktah--engaged; upasate--worships; sraddhaya--with faith;
paraya--transcendental; upetah--engages; te--they; me--Me; yukta-tamah-
-most perfect; matah--I consider.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: He whose mind is fixed on My personal form,
always engaged in worshiping Me with great and transcendental faith, isconsidered by Me to be most perfect.
PURPORTIn answer to Arjuna's question, Krsna clearly says that he who
concentrates upon His personal form and who worships Him with faith anddevotion is to be considered the most perfect in yoga. For one in suchKrsna consciousness there are no material activities because everythingis done for Krsna. A pure devotee is constantly engaged. Sometimes hechants, sometimes he hears or reads books about Krsna, or sometimes hecooks prasadam or goes to the marketplace to purchase something forKrsna, or sometimes he washes the temple or the dishes--whatever hedoes, he does not let a single moment pass without devoting hisactivities to Krsna. Such action is in full samadhi.
TEXTS 3-4
ye tv aksaram anirdesyam
avyaktam paryupasatesarvatra-gam acintyam cakuta-stham acalam dhruvam
sanniyamyendriya-gramam
sarvatra sama-buddhayahte prapnuvanti mam evasarva-bhuta-hite ratah
SYNONYMSye--those; tu--but; aksaram--which is beyond the perception of the
senses; anirdesyam--indefinite; avyaktam--unmanifested; paryupasate--completely engages; sarvatra-gam--all-pervading; acintyam--inconceivable; ca--also; kuta-stham--in the center; acalam--immovable;dhruvam--fixed; sanniyamya--controlling; indriya-gramam--all thesenses; sarvatra--everywhere; sama-buddhayah--equally disposed; te--they; prapnuvanti--achieve; mam--unto Me; eva--certainly; sarva-bhuta-hite--all living entities' welfare; ratah--engaged.
TRANSLATIONBut those who fully worship the unmanifested, that which lies beyond
the perception of the senses, the all-pervading, inconceivable, fixedand immovable--the impersonal conception of the Absolute Truth--bycontrolling the various senses and being equally disposed to everyone,such persons, engaged in the welfare of all, at last achieve Me.
PURPORTThose who do not directly worship the Supreme Godhead, Krsna, but who
attempt to achieve the same goal by an indirect process, alsoultimately achieve the supreme goal, Sri Krsna, as is stated, "After
many births the man of wisdom seeks refuge in Me, knowing that Vasudeva
is all." When a person comes to full knowledge after many births, hesurrenders unto Lord Krsna. If one approaches the Godhead by the methodmentioned in this verse, he has to control the senses, render serviceto everyone and engage in the welfare of all beings. It is inferredthat one has to approach Lord Krsna, otherwise there is no perfectrealization. Often there is much penance involved before one fullysurrenders unto Him.In order to perceive the Supersoul within the individual soul, one hasto cease the sensual activities of seeing, hearing, tasting, working,etc. Then one comes to understand that the Supreme Soul is presenteverywhere. Realizing this, one envies no living entity--he sees nodifference between man and animal because he sees soul only, not theouter covering. But for the common man, this method of impersonalrealization is very difficult.
TEXT 5
kleso 'dhikataras tesam
avyaktasakta-cetasamavyakta hi gatir duhkhamdehavadbhir avapyate
SYNONYMSklesah--trouble; adhika-tarah--more troublesome; tesam--of them;
avyakta--to unmanifested; asakta--being attached; cetasam--of thosewhose minds; avyakta--toward the unmanifested; hi--certainly; gatihduhkham--progress is troublesome; deha-vadbhih--of the embodiments;avapyate--achieve.
TRANSLATIONFor those whose minds are attached to the unmanifested, impersonal
feature of the Supreme, advancement is very troublesome. To makeprogress in that discipline is always difficult for those who areembodied.
PURPORTThe group of transcendentalists who follow the path of the
inconceivable, unmanifested, impersonal feature of the Supreme Lord arecalled jnana-yogis, and persons who are in full Krsna consciousness,engaged in devotional service to the Lord, are called bhakti-yogis.Now, here the difference between jnana-yoga and bhakti-yoga isdefinitely expressed. The process of jnana-yoga, although ultimatelybringing one to the same goal, is very troublesome, whereas the path ofbhakti-yoga, the process of being in direct service to the SupremePersonality of Godhead, is easier and is natural for the embodied soul.The individual soul is embodied since time immemorial. It is verydifficult for him to simply theoretically understand that he is not thebody. Therefore, the bhakti-yogi accepts the Deity of Krsna asworshipable because there is some bodily conception fixed in the mind,which can thus be applied. Of course, worshiping the SupremePersonality of Godhead in His form within the temple is not idolworship. There is evidence in the Vedic literature that worship may besaguna and nirguna--of the Supreme possessing or not possessingattributes. Worship of the Deity in the temple is saguna worship, for
the Lord is represented by material qualities. But the form of the
Lord, though represented by material qualities such as stone, wood oroil paint, is not actually material. That is the absolute nature of theSupreme Lord.A crude example may be given here. We may find some mailboxes on thestreet, and if we post our letters in those boxes, they will naturallygo to their destination without difficulty. But any old box, or animitation, which we may find somewhere, which is not authorized by thepost office, will not do the work. Similarly, God has an authorizedrepresentation in the Deity form, which is called arca-vigraha. Thisarca-vigraha is an incarnation of the Supreme Lord. God will acceptservice through that form. The Lord is omnipotent and all-powerful;therefore, by His incarnation as arca-vigraha, He can accept theservices of the devotee, just to make it convenient for the man inconditioned life.So, for a devotee, there is no difficulty in approaching the Supremeimmediately and directly, but for those who are following theimpersonal way to spiritual realization, the path is difficult. Theyhave to understand the unmanifested representation of the Supremethrough such Vedic literatures as the Upanisads, and they have to learnthe language, understand the nonperceptual feelings, and they have torealize all these processes. This is not very easy for a common man. Aperson in Krsna consciousness, engaged in devotional service, simply bythe guidance of the bona fide spiritual master, simply by offeringregulative obeisances unto the Deity, simply by hearing the glories ofthe Lord, and simply by eating the remnants of foodstuffs offered tothe Lord, realizes the Supreme Personality of Godhead very easily.There is no doubt that the impersonalists are unnecessarily taking atroublesome path with the risk of not realizing the Absolute Truth atthe ultimate end. But the personalist, without any risk, trouble, ordifficulty, approaches the Supreme Personality directly. A similarpassage appears in Srimad-Bhagavatam. It is stated there that if oneultimately has to surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead(this surrendering process is called bhakti), but instead takes thetrouble to understand what is Brahman and what is not Brahman andspends his whole life in that way, the result is simply troublesome.Therefore it is advised here that one should not take up thistroublesome path of self-realization because there is uncertainty inthe ultimate result.A living entity is eternally an individual soul, and if he wants tomerge into the spiritual whole, he may accomplish the realization ofthe eternal and knowledgeable aspects of his original nature, but theblissful portion is not realized. By the grace of some devotee, such atranscendentalist, highly learned in the process of jnana-yoga, maycome to the point of bhakti-yoga, or devotional service. At that time,long practice in impersonalism also becomes a source of trouble,because he cannot give up the idea. Therefore an embodied soul isalways in difficulty with the unmanifest, both at the time of practiceand at the time of realization. Every living soul is partiallyindependent, and one should know for certain that this unmanifestedrealization is against the nature of his spiritual blissful self. Oneshould not take up this process. For every individual living entity theprocess of Krsna consciousness, which entails full engagement indevotional service, is the best way. If one wants to ignore thisdevotional service, there is the danger of turning to atheism. Thusthis process of centering attention on the unmanifested, theinconceivable, which is beyond the approach of the senses, as already
expressed in this verse, should never be encouraged at any time,
especially in this age. It is not advised by Lord Krsna.
TEXTS 6-7
ye tu sarvani karmani
mayi sannyasya mat-parahananyenaiva yogenamam dhyayanta upasate
tesam aham samuddharta
mrtyu-samsara-sagaratbhavami na cirat parthamayy avesita-cetasam
SYNONYMSye--one who; tu--but; sarvani--everything; karmani--activities; mayi--
unto Me; sannyasya--giving up; mat-parah--being attached to Me;ananyena--without division; eva--certainly; yogena--by practice of suchbhakti-yoga; mam--unto Me; dhyayantah--meditating; upasate--worship;tesam--of them; aham--I; samuddharta--deliverer; mrtyu--death; samsara--material existence; sagarat--from the ocean; bhavami--become; nacirat--not a long time; partha--O son of Prtha; mayi--unto Me; avesita--fixed; cetasam--of those whose minds are like that.
TRANSLATIONFor one who worships Me, giving up all his activities unto Me and being
devoted to Me without deviation, engaged in devotional service andalways meditating upon Me, who has fixed his mind upon Me, O son ofPrtha--for him I am the swift deliverer from the ocean of birth anddeath.
PURPORTIt is explicitly stated here that the devotees are very fortunate to be
delivered very soon from material existence by the Lord. In puredevotional service one comes to the realization that God is great andthat the individual soul is subordinate to Him. His duty is to renderservice to the Lord--if not, then he will render service to maya.As stated before, the Supreme Lord can only be appreciated bydevotional service. Therefore, one should be fully devoted. One shouldfix his mind fully on Krsna in order to achieve Him. One should workonly for Krsna. It does not matter in what kind of work one engages,but that work should be done only for Krsna. That is the standard ofdevotional service. The devotee does not desire any achievement otherthan pleasing the Supreme Personality of Godhead. His life's mission isto please Krsna, and he can sacrifice everything for Krsna'ssatisfaction, just as Arjuna did in the Battle of Kuruksetra. Theprocess is very simple: one can devote himself in his occupation andengage at the same time in chanting Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, KrsnaKrsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. Suchtranscendental chanting attracts the devotee to the Personality ofGodhead.The Supreme Lord herein promises that He will without delay deliver apure devotee thus engaged from the ocean of material existence. Thosewho are advanced in yoga practice can willfully transfer the soul to
whatever planet they like by the yoga process, and others take the
opportunity in various ways, but as far as the devotee is concerned, itis clearly stated here that the Lord Himself takes him. He does notneed to wait to become very experienced in order to transfer himself tothe spiritual sky.In the Varaha Purana this verse appears:
nayami paramam sthanam
arcir-adi-gatim vinagaruda-skandham aropyayatheccham anivaritah
The purport of this verse is that a devotee does not need to practice
astanga-yoga in order to transfer his soul to the spiritual planets.The responsibility is taken by the Supreme Lord Himself. He clearlystates here that He Himself becomes the deliverer. A child iscompletely cared for by his parents, and thus his position is secure.Similarly, a devotee does not need to endeavor to transfer himself byyoga practice to other planets. Rather, the Supreme Lord, by His greatmercy, comes at once, riding on His bird carrier Garuda, and at oncedelivers the devotee from this material existence. Although a man whohas fallen in the ocean may struggle very hard and may be very expertin swimming, he cannot save himself. But if someone comes and picks himup from the water, then he is easily rescued. Similarly, the Lord picksup the devotee from this material existence. One simply has to practicethe easy process of Krsna consciousness and fully engage himself indevotional service. Any intelligent man should always prefer theprocess of devotional service to all other paths. In the Narayaniyathis is confirmed as follows:
ya vai sadhana-sampattih
purusartha-catustayetaya vina tad apnotinaro narayanasrayah
The purport of this verse is that one should not engage in the
different processes of fruitive activity or cultivate knowledge by themental speculative process. One who is devoted to the SupremePersonality can attain all the benefits derived from other yogicprocesses, speculation, rituals, sacrifices, charities, etc. That isthe specific benediction of devotional service.Simply by chanting the holy name of Krsna--Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna,Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare--adevotee of the Lord can approach the supreme destination easily andhappily, but this destination cannot be approached by any other processof religion.The conclusion of Bhagavad-gita is stated in the Eighteenth Chapter:
sarva-dharman parityajya
mam ekam saranam vrajaaham tvam sarva-papebhyomoksayisyami ma sucah
One should give up all other processes of self-realization and simply
execute devotional service in Krsna consciousness. That will enable oneto reach the highest perfection of life. There is no need for one toconsider the sinful actions of his past life because the Supreme Lordfully takes charge of him. Therefore one should not futilely try to
deliver himself in spiritual realization. Let everyone take shelter of
the supreme omnipotent Godhead, Krsna. That is the highest perfectionof life.
TEXT 8
mayy eva mana adhatsva
mayi buddhim nivesayanivasisyasi mayy evaata urdhvam na samsayah
SYNONYMSmayi--unto Me; eva--certainly; manah--mind; adhatsva--fix; mayi--upon
Me; buddhim--intelligence; nivesaya--apply; nivasisyasi--you live;mayi--unto Me; eva--certainly; atah urdhvam--thereafter; na--never;samsayah--doubt.
TRANSLATIONJust fix your mind upon Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
engage all your intelligence in Me. Thus you will live with Me always,without a doubt.
PURPORTOne who is engaged in Lord Krsna's devotional service lives in a direct
relationship with the Supreme Lord, so there is no doubt that hisposition is transcendental from the very beginning. A devotee does notlive on the material plane--he lives in Krsna. The holy name of theLord and the Lord are nondifferent; therefore when a devotee chantsHare Krsna, Krsna and His internal potency are dancing on the tongue ofthe devotee. When he offers Krsna food, Krsna directly accepts theseeatables, and the devotee becomes Krsna-ized by eating the remnants.One who does not engage in such service cannot understand how this isso, although this is a process recommended in the Bhagavad-gita and inother Vedic literatures.
TEXT 9
atha cittam samadhatum
na saknosi mayi sthiramabhyasa-yogena tatomam icchaptum dhananjaya
SYNONYMSatha--if, therefore; cittam--mind; samadhatum--fixing; na--not;
saknosi--able; mayi--upon Me; sthiram--fixed; abhyasa--practice;yogena--by devotional service; tatah--therefore; mam--Me; iccha--desire; aptum--to get; dhanam-jaya--O Arjuna.
TRANSLATIONMy dear Arjuna, O winner of wealth, if you cannot fix your mind upon Me
without deviation, then follow the regulative principles of bhakti-yoga. In this way you will develop a desire to attain to Me.
PURPORT
In this verse, two different processes of bhakti-yoga are indicated.
The first applies to one who has actually developed an attachment forKrsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by transcendental love. Andthe other is for one who has not developed an attachment for theSupreme Person by transcendental love. For this second class there aredifferent prescribed rules and regulations one can follow to beultimately elevated to the stage of attachment to Krsna.Bhakti-yoga is the purification of the senses. At the present moment inmaterial existence the senses are always impure, being engaged in sensegratification. But, by the practice of bhakti-yoga these senses canbecome purified, and in the purified state they come directly incontact with the Supreme Lord. In this material existence, I may beengaged in some service to some master, but I don't really lovinglyserve my master. I simply serve to get some money. And the master alsois not in love; he takes service from me and pays me. So there is noquestion of love. But for spiritual life, one must be elevated to thepure stage of love. That stage of love can be achieved by practice ofdevotional service, performed with the present senses.This love of God is now in a dormant state in everyone's heart. And,there, love of God is manifested in different ways, but it iscontaminated by material association. Now the material association hasto be purified, and that dormant, natural love for Krsna has to berevived. That is the whole process.To practice the regulative principles of bhakti-yoga one should, underthe guidance of an expert spiritual master, follow certain principles:one should rise early in the morning, take bath, enter the temple andoffer prayers and chant Hare Krsna, then collect flowers to offer tothe Deity, cook foodstuffs to offer to the Deity, take prasadam, and soon. There are various rules and regulations which one should follow.And one should constantly hear Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam frompure devotees. This practice can help anyone to rise to the level oflove of God, and then he is sure of his progress into the spiritualkingdom of God. This practice of bhakti-yoga, under the rules andregulations, with the direction of a spiritual master, will surelybring one to the stage of love of God.
TEXT 10
abhyase 'py asamartho 'si
mat-karma-paramo bhavamad-artham api karmanikurvan siddhim avapsyasi
SYNONYMSabhyase--in practice of; api--even; asamarthah--unable; asi--you are;
mat-karma--My work; paramah--supreme; bhava--you become; mat-artham--for My sake; api--even though; karmani--work; kurvan--performing;siddhim--perfection; avapsyasi--achieve.
TRANSLATIONIf you cannot practice the regulations of bhakti-yoga, then just try to
work for Me, because by working for Me you will come to the perfectstage.
PURPORT
One who is not able even to practice the regulative principles of
bhakti-yoga, under the guidance of a spiritual master, can still bedrawn to this perfectional stage by working for the Supreme Lord. Howto do this work has already been explained in the fifty-fifth verse ofthe Eleventh Chapter. One should be sympathetic to the propagation ofKrsna consciousness. There are many devotees who are engaged in thepropagation of Krsna consciousness, and they require help. So, even ifone cannot directly practice the regulative principles of bhakti-yoga,he can try to help such work. Every endeavor requires land, capital,organization and labor. Just as in business one requires a place tostay, some capital to use, some labor and some organization to expand,so the same is required in the service of Krsna. The only difference isthat in materialism one works for sense gratification. The same work,however, can be performed for the satisfaction of Krsna, and that isspiritual activity. If one has sufficient money, he can help inbuilding an office or temple for propagating Krsna consciousness. Or hecan help with publications. There are various fields of activity, andone should be interested in such activities. If one cannot sacrificethe results of his activities, the same person can still sacrifice somepercentage to propagate Krsna consciousness. This voluntary service tothe cause of Krsna consciousness will help one rise to a higher stateof love for God, whereupon one becomes perfect.
TEXT 11
athaitad apy asakto 'si
kartum mad-yogam asritahsarva-karma-phala-tyagamtatah kuru yatatmavan
SYNONYMSatha--even though; etat--this; api--also; asaktah--unable; asi--you
are; kartum--to perform; mat--unto Me; yogam--devotional service;asritah--refuge; sarva-karma--all activities; phala--result; tyagam--renunciation; tatah--therefore; kuru--do; yata-atma-van--self-situated.
TRANSLATIONIf, however, you are unable to work in this consciousness, then try to
act giving up all results of your work and try to be self-situated.
PURPORTIt may be that one is unable to even sympathize with the activities of
Krsna consciousness because of social, familial or religiousconsiderations or because of some other impediments. If one attacheshimself directly to the activities of Krsna consciousness, there may beobjections from family members, or so many other difficulties. For onewho has such a problem, it is advised that he sacrifice the accumulatedresult of his activities to some good cause. Such procedures aredescribed in the Vedic rules. There are many descriptions of sacrificesand special functions of punya, or special work in which the result ofone's previous action may be applied. Thus one may gradually becomeelevated to the state of knowledge. It is also found that when one whois not even interested in the activities of Krsna consciousness gives
charity to some hospital or some other social institution, he gives up
the hard-earned results of his activities. That is also recommendedhere because by the practice of giving up the fruits of one'sactivities one is sure to purify his mind gradually, and in thatpurified stage of mind one becomes able to understand Krsnaconsciousness. Of course Krsna consciousness is not dependent on anyother experience, because Krsna consciousness itself can purify one'smind, but if there are impediments to accepting Krsna consciousness,one may try to give up the results of his actions. In that respect,social service, community service, national service, sacrifice forone's country, etc., may be accepted so that some day one may come tothe stage of pure devotional service to the Supreme Lord. In Bhagavad-gita (18.46) we find it is stated, yatah pravrttir bhutanam: if onedecides to sacrifice for the supreme cause, even if he does not knowthat the supreme cause is Krsna, he will come gradually to understandthat Krsna is the supreme cause by the sacrificial method.
TEXT 12
sreyo hi jnanam abhyasaj
jnanad dhyanam visisyatedhyanat karma-phala-tyagastyagac chantir anantaram
SYNONYMSsreyah--better; hi--certainly; jnanam--knowledge; abhyasat--by
practice; jnanat--better than knowledge; dhyanam--meditation;visisyate--especially considered; dhyanat--from meditation; karma-phala-tyagah--renunciation of the results of fruitive action; tyagat--by such renunciation; santih--peace; anantaram--thereafter.
TRANSLATIONIf you cannot take to this practice, then engage yourself in the
cultivation of knowledge. Better than knowledge, however, ismeditation, and better than meditation is renunciation of the fruits ofaction, for by such renunciation one can attain peace of mind.
PURPORTAs mentioned in the previous verses, there are two kinds of devotional
service: the way of regulative principles and the way of fullattachment in love to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For those whoare actually not able to follow the principles of Krsna consciousnessit is better to cultivate knowledge because by knowledge one can beable to understand his real position. Gradually knowledge will developto the point of meditation. By meditation one can be able to understandthe Supreme Personality of Godhead by a gradual process. There areprocesses which make one understand that one himself is the Supreme,and that sort of meditation is preferred if one is unable to engage indevotional service. If one is not able to meditate in such a way, thenthere are prescribed duties, as enjoined in the Vedic literature, forthe brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas and sudras, which we shall find in alater chapter of Bhagavad-gita. But in all cases, one should give upthe result or fruits of labor; this means to employ the result of karmafor some good cause.
In summary, to reach the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the highest
goal, there are two processes: one process is by gradual development,and the other process is direct. Devotional service in Krsnaconsciousness is the direct method, and the other method involvesrenouncing the fruits of one's activities. Then one can come to thestage of knowledge, then to the stage of meditation, then to the stageof understanding the Supersoul, and then to the stage of the SupremePersonality of Godhead. One may either take the step by step process orthe direct path. The direct process is not possible for everyone;therefore the indirect process is also good. It is, however, to beunderstood that the indirect process is not recommended for Arjunabecause he is already at the stage of loving devotional service to theSupreme Lord. It is for others who are not at this stage; for them thegradual process of renunciation, knowledge, meditation and realizationof the Supersoul and Brahman should be followed. But as far asBhagavad-gita is concerned, it is the direct method that is stressed.Everyone is advised to take to the direct method and surrender unto theSupreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna.
TEXTS 13-14
advesta sarva-bhutanam
maitrah karuna eva canirmamo nirahankarahsama-duhkha-sukhah ksami
santustah satatam yogi
yatatma drdha-niscayahmayy arpita-mano-buddhiryo mad-bhaktah sa me priyah
SYNONYMSadvesta--nonenvious; sarva-bhutanam--for all living entities; maitrah--
friendly; karunah--kindly; eva--certainly; ca--also; nirmamah--with nosense of proprietorship; nirahankarah--without false ego; sama--equally; duhkha--distress; sukhah--happiness; ksami--forgiving;santustah--satisfied; satatam--always; yogi--engaged in devotion; yata-atma--self-controlled; drdha-niscayah--with determination; mayi--uponMe; arpita--engaged; manah--mind; buddhih--intelligence; yah--one who;mat-bhaktah--My devotee; sah me priyah--he is dear to Me.
TRANSLATIONOne who is not envious but who is a kind friend to all living entities,
who does not think himself a proprietor, who is free from false ego andequal both in happiness and distress, who is always satisfied andengaged in devotional service with determination and whose mind andintelligence are in agreement with Me--he is very dear to Me.
PURPORTComing again to the point of pure devotional service, the Lord is
describing the transcendental qualifications of a pure devotee in thesetwo verses. A pure devotee is never disturbed in any circumstances. Noris he envious of anyone. Nor does a devotee become his enemy's enemy;he thinks that one is acting as his enemy due to his own past misdeeds.Thus it is better to suffer than to protest. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam
(10.14.8) it is stated: tat te 'nukampam susamiksamano. Whenever a
devotee is in distress or has fallen into difficulty, he thinks that itis the Lord's mercy upon him. He thinks: "Thanks to my past misdeeds Ishould suffer far, far greater than I am suffering now. So it is by themercy of the Supreme Lord that I am not getting all the punishment I amdue. I am just getting a little, by the mercy of the SupremePersonality of Godhead." Therefore he is always calm, quiet andpatient, despite many distressful conditions. A devotee is always kindto everyone, even to his enemy. Nirmama means that a devotee does notattach much importance to the pains and trouble pertaining to the bodybecause he knows perfectly well that he is not the material body. Hedoes not identify with the body; therefore he is freed from theconception of false ego and is equipoised both in happiness anddistress. He is tolerant, and he is satisfied with whatever comes bythe grace of the Supreme Lord. He does not endeavor much to achievesomething with great difficulty; therefore he is always joyful. He is acompletely perfect mystic because he is fixed in the instructionsreceived from the spiritual master, and because his senses arecontrolled, he is determined. He is not swayed by false argumentbecause no one can lead him from the fixed determination of devotionalservice. He is fully conscious that Krsna is the eternal Lord, so noone can disturb him. All his qualifications enable him to dependentirely on the Supreme Lord. Such a standard of devotional service isundoubtedly very rare, but a devotee becomes situated in that stage byfollowing the regulative principles of devotional service. Furthermore,the Lord says that such a devotee is very dear to Him, for the Lord isalways pleased with all his activities in full Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 15
yasman nodvijate loko
lokan nodvijate ca yahharsamarsa-bhayodvegairmukto yah sa ca me priyah
SYNONYMSyasmat--from whom; na--never; udvijate--agitates; lokah--persons;
lokat--persons; na--never; udvijate--disturbed; ca--also; yah--anyone;harsa--happiness; amarsa--distress; bhaya--fear; udvegaih--withanxiety; muktah--freed; yah--who; sah--anyone; ca--also; me--Mine;priyah--very dear.
TRANSLATIONHe for whom no one is put into difficulty and who is not disturbed by
anxiety, who is steady in happiness and distress, is very dear to Me.
PURPORTA few of a devotee's qualifications are further being described. No one
is put into difficulty, anxiety, fearfulness or dissatisfaction by sucha devotee. Since a devotee is kind to everyone, he does not act in sucha way as to put others into anxiety. At the same time, if others try toput a devotee into anxiety, he is not disturbed. It is by the grace ofthe Lord that he is so practiced that he is not disturbed by anyoutward disturbance. Actually because a devotee is always engrossed inKrsna consciousness and engaged in devotional service, all such
material circumstances cannot woo him. Generally a materialistic person
becomes very happy when there is something for his sense gratificationand his body, but when he sees that others have something for theirsense gratification and he hasn't, he is sorry and envious. When he isexpecting some retaliation from an enemy, he is in a state of fear, andwhen he cannot successfully execute something he becomes dejected. Buta devotee is always transcendental to all these disturbances; thereforehe is very dear to Krsna.
TEXT 16
anapeksah sucir daksa
udasino gata-vyathahsarvarambha-parityagiyo mad-bhaktah sa me priyah
SYNONYMSanapeksah--neutral; sucih--pure; daksah--expert; udasinah--free from
care; gata-vyathah--freed from all distress; sarva-arambha--allendeavors; parityagi--renouncer; yah--anyone; mat-bhaktah--My devotee;sah--he; me--Me; priyah--very dear.
TRANSLATIONA devotee who is not dependent on the ordinary course of activities,
who is pure, expert, without cares, free from all pains, and who doesnot strive for some result, is very dear to Me.
PURPORTMoney may be offered to a devotee, but he should not struggle to
acquire it. If automatically by the grace of the Supreme, money comesto him, he is not agitated. Naturally a devotee takes bath at leasttwice in a day and rises early in the morning for devotional service.Thus he is naturally clean both inwardly and outwardly. A devotee isalways expert because he fully knows the essence of all activities oflife and he is convinced of the authoritative scriptures. A devoteenever takes the part of a particular party; therefore he is carefree.He is never pained, because he is free from all designations; he knowsthat his body is a designation, so if there are some bodily pains, heis free. The pure devotee does not endeavor for anything which isagainst the principles of devotional service. For example, constructinga big building requires great energy, and a devotee does not take tosuch business if it does not benefit him by advancing his devotionalservice. He may construct a temple for the Lord, and for that he maytake all kinds of anxiety, but he does not construct a big house forhis personal relations.
TEXT 17
yo na hrsyati na dvesti
na socati na kanksatisubhasubha-parityagibhaktiman yah sa me priyah
SYNONYMS
yah--one who; na--never; hrsyati--takes pleasure; na--never; dvesti--
grieves; na--never; socati--laments; na--never; kanksati--desires;subha--auspicious; asubha--inauspicious; parityagi--renouncer; bhakti-man--devotee; yah--one who; sah--he is; me--Mine; priyah--dear.
TRANSLATIONOne who neither grasps pleasure or grief, who neither laments nor
desires, and who renounces both auspicious and inauspicious things, isvery dear to Me.
PURPORTA pure devotee is neither happy nor distressed over material gain and
loss, nor is he very much anxious to get a son or a disciple, nor is hedistressed by not getting them. If he loses anything which is very dearto him, he does not lament. Similarly, if he does not get that which hedesires, he is not distressed. He is transcendental in the face of allkinds of auspicious, inauspicious and sinful activities. He is preparedto accept all kinds of risks for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord.Nothing is an impediment in the discharge of his devotional service.Such a devotee is very dear to Krsna.
TEXTS 18-19
samah satrau ca mitre ca
tatha manapamanayohsitosna-sukha-duhkhesusamah sanga-vivarjitah
tulya-ninda-stutir mauni
santusto yena kenacitaniketah sthira-matirbhaktiman me priyo narah
SYNONYMSsamah--equal; satrau--to the enemy; ca--also; mitre--to friends; ca--
also; tatha--so; mana--honor; apamanayoh--dishonor; sita--cold; usna--heat; sukha--happiness; duhkhesu--distress; samah--equipoised; sanga-vivarjitah--free from all association; tulya--equal; ninda--defamation;stutih--repute; mauni--silent; santustah--satisfied; yena--somehow;kena--or other; cit--if; aniketah--having no residence; sthira--fixed;matih--determination; bhakti-man--engaged in devotion; me--My; priyah--dear; narah--a man.
TRANSLATIONOne who is equal to friends and enemies, who is equipoised in honor and
dishonor, heat and cold, happiness and distress, fame and infamy, whois always free from contaminated association, always silent andsatisfied with anything, who doesn't care for any residence, who isfixed in knowledge and engaged in devotional service, is very dear toMe.
PURPORT
A devotee is always free from all bad association. Sometimes one is
praised and sometimes one is defamed; that is the nature of humansociety. But a devotee is always transcendental to artificial fame andinfamy, distress or happiness. He is very patient. He does not speak ofanything but the topics about Krsna; therefore he is called silent.Silent does not mean that one should not speak; silent means that oneshould not speak nonsense. One should speak only of essentials, and themost essential speech for the devotee is to speak of the Supreme Lord.He is happy in all conditions; sometimes he may get very palatablefoodstuffs, sometimes not, but he is satisfied. Nor does he care forany residential facility. He may sometimes live underneath a tree, andhe may sometimes live in a very palatial building; he is attracted toneither. He is called fixed because he is fixed in his determinationand knowledge. We may find some repetition in the descriptions of thequalifications of a devotee, but this is just to give an illustrationof the fact that a devotee must acquire all these qualifications.Without good qualifications, one cannot be a pure devotee. Haravabhaktasya kuto mahad-gunah: one who is not a devotee has no goodqualification. One who wants to be recognized as a devotee shoulddevelop the good qualifications. Of course he does not extraneouslyendeavor to acquire these qualifications, but engagement in Krsnaconsciousness and devotional service automatically help him developthem.
TEXT 20
ye tu dharmamrtam idam
yathoktam paryupasatesraddadhana mat-paramabhaktas te 'tiva me priyah
SYNONYMSye--one who; tu--but; dharma--of religion; amrtam--nectar; idam--this;
yatha--as; uktam--said; paryupasate--completely engage; sraddadhanah--with faith; mat-paramah--taking the Supreme Lord as everything;bhaktah--devotees; te--such persons; ativa--very, very; me--Me; priyah--dear.
TRANSLATIONHe who follows this imperishable path of devotional service and who
completely engages himself with faith, making Me the supreme goal, isvery, very dear to Me.
PURPORTIn this chapter the religion of eternal engagement, the explanation of
the processes of transcendental service for approaching the SupremeLord, is given. This process is very dear to the Lord, and He accepts aperson who is engaged in such a process. The question who is better--one who is engaged in the path of impersonal Brahman or one who isengaged in the personal service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead--was raised by Arjuna, and the Lord replied to him so explicitly thatthere is no doubt that devotional service to the Personality of Godheadis the best of all processes of spiritual realization. In other words,in this chapter it is decided that through good association, onedevelops attachment for pure devotional service and thereby accepts a
