standard, but still he should be considered superior to all other
philosophers and yogis. One who always engages in Krsna consciousnessshould be understood to be the perfect saintly person. His accidentalnondevotional activities will diminish, and he will soon be situatedwithout any doubt in complete perfection. The pure devotee has noactual chance to fall down because the Supreme Godhead personally takescare of His pure devotees. Therefore, the intelligent person shouldtake directly to this process of Krsna consciousness and happily livein this material world. He will eventually receive the supreme award ofKrsna.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Ninth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of the Most Confidential Knowledge.
“Bhagavad-gita As It Is ” by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of
this book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended forpersonal non-commercial use only, under the “fair use” guidelinesestablished by international copyright laws. You may use thiselectronic file to evaluate the printed version of this book, for yourown private use, or for short excerpts used in academic works,research, student papers, presentations, and the like. You candistribute this evaluation copy to others over the Internet, so long asyou keep this copyright information intact. You may not reproduce morethan ten percent (10%) of this book in any media without the expresswritten permission from the copyright holders. Reference any excerptsin the following way: “Excerpted from “Bhagavad-gita As It Is” by A.C.Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta BookTrust International, www.Krishna.com .”
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1972-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or toevaluate dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website ofthe publishers, www.Krishna.com .
Chapter 10
The Opulence of the Absolute
TEXT 1
sri-bhagavan uvaca
bhuya eva maha-bahosrnu me paramam vacahyat te 'ham priyamanayavaksyami hita-kamyaya
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; bhuyah--
again; eva--certainly; maha-baho--O mighty-armed; srnu--just hear; me--My; paramam--supreme; vacah--information; yat--that which; te--to you;
aham--I; priyamanaya--thinking you dear to Me; vaksyami--say; hita-
kamyaya--for your benefit.
TRANSLATIONThe Supreme Lord said: My dear friend, mighty-armed Arjuna, listen
again to My supreme word, which I shall impart to you for your benefitand which will give you great joy.
PURPORTThe word bhagavan is explained thus by Parasara Muni: one who is full
in six opulences, who has full strength, full fame, wealth, knowledge,beauty and renunciation, is Bhagavan, or the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. While Krsna was present on this earth, He displayed all sixopulences. Therefore great sages like Parasara Muni have all acceptedKrsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Now Krsna is instructingArjuna in more confidential knowledge of His opulences and His work.Previously, beginning with the Seventh Chapter, the Lord alreadyexplained His different energies and how they are acting. Now in thischapter He explains His specific opulences to Arjuna. In the previouschapter He has clearly explained His different energies to establishdevotion in firm conviction. Again in this chapter He tells Arjunaabout His manifestations and various opulences.The more one hears about the Supreme God, the more one becomes fixed indevotional service. One should always hear about the Lord in theassociation of devotees; that will enhance one's devotional service.Discourses in the society of devotees can take place only among thosewho are really anxious to be in Krsna consciousness. Others cannot takepart in such discourses. The Lord clearly tells Arjuna that because heis very dear to Him, for his benefit such discourses are taking place.
TEXT 2
na me viduh sura-ganah
prabhavam na maharsayahaham adir hi devanammaharsinam ca sarvasah
SYNONYMSna--never; me--My; viduh--knows; sura-ganah--demigods; prabhavam--
opulences; na--never; maha-rsayah--great sages; aham--I am; adih--theorigin; hi--certainly; devanam--of the demigods; maha-rsinam--of thegreat sages; ca--also; sarvasah--in all respects.
TRANSLATIONNeither the hosts of demigods nor the great sages know My origin, for,
in every respect, I am the source of the demigods and the sages.
PURPORTAs stated in the Brahma-samhita, Lord Krsna is the Supreme Lord. No one
is greater than Him; He is the cause of all causes. Here it is alsostated by the Lord personally that He is the cause of all the demigodsand sages. Even the demigods and great sages cannot understand Krsna;they can understand neither His name nor His personality, so what is
the position of the so-called scholars of this tiny planet? No one can
understand why this Supreme God comes to earth as an ordinary humanbeing and executes such commonplace and yet wonderful activities. Oneshould know, then, that scholarship is not the qualification necessaryto understand Krsna. Even the demigods and the great sages have triedto understand Krsna by their mental speculation, and they have failedto do so. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam also it is clearly said that eventhe great demigods are not able to understand the Supreme Personalityof Godhead. They can speculate to the limits of their imperfect sensesand can reach the opposite conclusion of impersonalism, of somethingnot manifested by the three qualities of material nature, or they canimagine something by mental speculation, but it is not possible tounderstand Krsna by such foolish speculation.Here the Lord indirectly says that if anyone wants to know the AbsoluteTruth, "Here I am present as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. I amthe Supreme." One should know this. Although one cannot understand theinconceivable Lord who is personally present, He nonetheless exists. Wecan actually understand Krsna, who is eternal, full of bliss andknowledge, simply by studying His words in Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam. The impersonal Brahman can be conceived by persons who arealready in the inferior energy of the Lord, but the Personality ofGodhead cannot be conceived unless one is in the transcendentalposition.Because most men cannot understand Krsna in His actual situation, outof His causeless mercy He descends to show favor to such speculators.Yet despite the Supreme Lord's uncommon activities, these speculators,due to contamination in the material energy, still think that theimpersonal Brahman is the Supreme. Only the devotees who are fullysurrendered unto the Supreme Lord can understand, by the grace of theSupreme Personality, that He is Krsna. The devotees of the Lord do notbother about the impersonal Brahman conception of God; their faith anddevotion bring them to surrender immediately unto the Supreme Lord, andout of the causeless mercy of Krsna, they can understand Krsna. No oneelse can understand Him. So even great sages agree: What is atma, whatis the Supreme? It is He whom we have to worship.
TEXT 3
yo mam ajam anadim ca
vetti loka-mahesvaramasammudhah sa martyesusarva-papaih pramucyate
SYNONYMSyah--anyone who; mam--unto Me; ajam--unborn; anadim--without beginning;
ca--also; vetti--knows; loka--the planets; maha-isvaram--the suprememaster; asammudhah--without doubt; sah--he; martyesu--among thosesubject to death; sarva-papaih--from all sinful reactions; pramucyate--is delivered.
TRANSLATIONHe who knows Me as the unborn, as the beginningless, as the Supreme
Lord of all the worlds--he, undeluded among men, is freed from allsins.
PURPORT
As stated in the Seventh Chapter (7.3), those who are trying to elevate
themselves to the platform of spiritual realization are not ordinarymen. They are superior to millions and millions of ordinary men whohave no knowledge of spiritual realization, but out of those actuallytrying to understand their spiritual situation, one who can come to theunderstanding that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, theproprietor of everything, the unborn, is the most successfulspiritually realized person. In that stage only, when one has fullyunderstood Krsna's supreme position, can one be free completely fromall sinful reactions.Here the word aja, meaning unborn, should not be confused with theliving entities, who are described in the Second Chapter as aja. TheLord is different from the living entities who are taking birth anddying due to material attachment. The conditioned souls are changingtheir bodies, but His body is not changeable. Even when He comes tothis material world, He comes as the same unborn; therefore in theFourth Chapter it is said that the Lord, by His internal potency, isnot under the inferior material energy, but is always in the superiorenergy.He was existing before the creation, and He is different from Hiscreation. All the demigods were created within this material world, butas far as Krsna is concerned, it is said that He is not created;therefore Krsna is different even from the great demigods like Brahmaand Siva. And because He is the creator of Brahma, Siva and all theother demigods, He is the Supreme Person of all planets.Sri Krsna is therefore different from everything that is created, andanyone who knows Him as such immediately becomes liberated from allsinful reaction. One must be liberated from all sinful activities to bein the knowledge of the Supreme Lord. Only by devotional service can Hebe known and not by any other means, as stated in Bhagavad-gita.One should not try to understand Krsna as a human being. As statedpreviously, only a foolish person thinks Him to be a human being. Thisis again expressed here in a different way. A man who is not foolish,who is intelligent enough to understand the constitutional position ofthe Godhead, is always free from all sinful reactions.If Krsna is known as the son of Devaki, then how can He be unborn? Thatis also explained in the Srimad-Bhagavatam: When He appeared beforeDevaki and Vasudeva, He was not born as an ordinary child; He appearedin His original form, and then He transformed Himself into an ordinarychild.Anything done under the direction of Krsna is transcendental. It cannotbe contaminated by the material reactions, which may be auspicious orinauspicious. The conception that there are things auspicious andinauspicious in the material world is more or less a mental concoctionbecause there is nothing auspicious in the material world. Everythingis inauspicious because the very material mask is inauspicious. Wesimply imagine it to be auspicious. Real auspiciousness depends onactivities in Krsna consciousness in full devotion and service.Therefore if we at all want our activities to be auspicious, then weshould work under the directions of the Supreme Lord. Such directionsare given in authoritative scriptures such as Srimad-Bhagavatam andBhagavad-gita, or from a bona fide spiritual master. Because thespiritual master is the representative of the Supreme Lord, hisdirection is directly the direction of the Supreme Lord. The spiritualmaster, saintly persons and scriptures direct in the same way. There isno contradiction in these three sources. All actions done under suchdirection are free from the reactions of pious or impious activities of
this material world. The transcendental attitude of the devotee in the
performance of activities is actually that of renunciation, and this iscalled sannyasa. Anyone acting under the direction of the Supreme Lordis actually a sannyasi and a yogi, and not the man who has simply takenthe dress of the sannyasi, or a pseudo yogi.
TEXTS 4-5
buddhir jnanam asammohah
ksama satyam damah samahsukham duhkham bhavo 'bhavobhayam cabhayam eva ca
ahimsa samata tustis
tapo danam yaso 'yasahbhavanti bhava bhutanammatta eva prthag-vidhah
SYNONYMSbuddhih--intelligence; jnanam--knowledge; asammohah--freedom from
doubt; ksama--forgiveness; satyam--truthfulness; damah--control of thesenses; samah--control of the mind; sukham--happiness; duhkham--distress; bhavah--birth; abhavah--death; bhayam--fear; ca--and;abhayam--without fear; eva--also; ca--and; ahimsa--nonviolence; samata--equilibrium; tustih--satisfaction; tapah--penance; danam--charity;yasah--fame; ayasah--infamy; bhavanti--become; bhavah--natures;bhutanam--of living entities; mattah--from Me; eva--certainly; prthak-vidhah--differently arranged.
TRANSLATIONIntelligence, knowledge, freedom from doubt and delusion, forgiveness,
truthfulness, self-control and calmness, pleasure and pain, birth,death, fear, fearlessness, nonviolence, equanimity, satisfaction,austerity, charity, fame and infamy are created by Me alone.
PURPORTThe different qualities of living entities, be they good or bad, are
all created by Krsna, and they are described here.Intelligence refers to the power of analyzing things in properperspective, and knowledge refers to understanding what is spirit andwhat is matter. Ordinary knowledge obtained by a university educationpertains only to matter, and it is not accepted here as knowledge.Knowledge means knowing the distinction between spirit and matter. Inmodern education there is no knowledge about the spirit; they aresimply taking care of the material elements and bodily needs. Thereforeacademic knowledge is not complete.Asammoha, freedom from doubt and delusion, can be achieved when one isnot hesitant and when he understands the transcendental philosophy.Slowly but surely he becomes free from bewilderment. Nothing should beaccepted blindly; everything should be accepted with care and withcaution. Ksama, forgiveness, should be practiced, and one should excusethe minor offenses of others. Satyam, truthfulness, means that factsshould be presented as they are for the benefit of others. Facts shouldnot be misrepresented. According to social conventions, it is said thatone can speak the truth only when it is palatable to others. But that
is not truthfulness. The truth should be spoken in a straightforward
way, so that others will understand actually what the facts are. If aman is a thief and if people are warned that he is a thief, that istruth. Although sometimes the truth is unpalatable, one should notrefrain from speaking it. Truthfulness demands that the facts bepresented as they are for the benefit of others. That is the definitionof truth.Self-control means that the senses should not be used for unnecessarypersonal enjoyment. There is no prohibition against meeting the properneeds of the senses but unnecessary sense enjoyment is detrimental forspiritual advancement. Therefore the senses should be restrained fromunnecessary use. Similarly, the mind should not indulge in unnecessarythoughts; that is called sama, or calmness. Nor should one spend one'stime pondering over earning money. That is a misuse of the thinkingpower. The mind should be used to understand the prime necessity ofhuman beings, and that should be presented authoritatively. The powerof thought should be developed in association with persons who areauthorities in the scriptures, saintly persons and spiritual mastersand those whose thinking is highly developed. Sukham, pleasure orhappiness, should always be in that which is favorable for thecultivation of the spiritual knowledge of Krsna consciousness. Andsimilarly, that which is painful or which causes distress is that whichis unfavorable for the cultivation of Krsna consciousness. Anythingfavorable for the development of Krsna consciousness should beaccepted, and anything unfavorable should be rejected.Bhava, birth, should be understood to refer to the body. As far as thesoul is concerned, there is neither birth nor death; that we havediscussed in the beginning of Bhagavad-gita. Birth and death apply toone's embodiment in the material world. Fear is due to worrying aboutthe future. A person in Krsna consciousness has no fear because by hisactivities he is sure to go back to the spiritual sky, back home, backto Godhead. Therefore his future is very bright. Others, however, donot know what their future holds; they have no knowledge of what thenext life holds. So they are therefore in constant anxiety. If we wantto get free from anxiety, then the best course is to understand Krsnaand be situated always in Krsna consciousness. In that way we will befree from all fear. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.2.37) it is statedthat fear is caused by our absorption in the illusory energy, but thosewho are free from the illusory energy, those who are confident thatthey are not the material body, that they are spiritual parts of theSupreme Personality of Godhead and are therefore engaged in thetranscendental service of the Supreme Godhead, have nothing to fear.Their future is very bright. This fear is a condition of persons whoare not in Krsna consciousness. Abhayam, fearlessness, is only possiblefor one in Krsna consciousness.Ahimsa, nonviolence, means that one should not do anything which willput others into misery or confusion. Material activities that arepromised by so many politicians, sociologists, philanthropists, etc.,do not produce very good results because the politicians andphilanthropists have no transcendental vision; they do not know what isactually beneficial for human society. Ahimsa means that people shouldbe trained in such a way that the full utilization of the human bodycan be achieved. The human body is meant for spiritual realization, soany movement or any commissions which do not further that end commitviolence on the human body. That which furthers the future spiritualhappiness of the people in general is called nonviolence.Samata, equanimity, refers to freedom from attachment and aversion. Tobe very much attached or to be very much detached is not the best. This
material world should be accepted without attachment or aversion.
Similarly, that which is favorable for prosecuting Krsna consciousnessshould be accepted; that which is unfavorable should be rejected. Thatis called samata, equanimity. A person in Krsna consciousness hasnothing to reject and nothing to accept unless it is useful in theprosecution of Krsna consciousness.Tusti, satisfaction, means that one should not be eager to gather moreand more material goods by unnecessary activity. One should besatisfied with whatever is obtained by the grace of the Supreme Lord;that is called satisfaction. Tapas means austerity or penance. Thereare many rules and definitions in the Vedas which apply here, likerising early in the morning and taking a bath. Sometimes it is verytroublesome to rise early in the morning, but whatever voluntarytrouble one may suffer in this way is called penance. Similarly, thereare prescriptions for fasting on certain days of the month. One may notbe inclined to practice such fasting, but because of his determinationto make advancement in the science of Krsna consciousness, he shouldaccept such bodily troubles which are recommended. However, one shouldnot fast unnecessarily or against Vedic injunctions. One should notfast for some political purpose; that is described in Bhagavad-gita asfasting in ignorance, and anything done in ignorance or passion doesnot lead to spiritual advancement. Everything done in the mode ofgoodness does advance one, however, and fasting done in terms of theVedic injunctions enriches one in spiritual knowledge.As far as charity is concerned, one should give fifty percent of hisearnings to some good cause. And what is a good cause? It is that whichis conducted in terms of Krsna consciousness. That is not only a goodcause, but it is the best cause. Because Krsna is good, His cause isalso good. Thus charity should be given to a person who is engaged inKrsna consciousness. According to Vedic literature, it is enjoined thatcharity should be given to the brahmanas. This practice is stillfollowed, although not very nicely in terms of the Vedic injunction.But still the injunction is that charity should be given to thebrahmanas. Why? Because they are engaged in higher cultivation ofspiritual knowledge. A brahmana is supposed to devote his whole life tounderstanding Brahman. A brahma-jana is one who knows Brahman; he iscalled a brahmana. Thus charity is offered to the brahmanas becausesince they are always engaged in higher spiritual service they have notime to earn their livelihood. In the Vedic literature, charity is alsoto be awarded to the renouncer of life, the sannyasi. The sannyasis begfrom door to door, not for money but for missionary purposes. Thesystem is that they go from door to door to awaken the householdersfrom the slumber of ignorance. Because the householders are engaged infamily affairs and have forgotten their actual purpose in life--awakening their Krsna consciousness--it is the business of thesannyasis to go as beggars to the householders and encourage them to beKrsna conscious. As it is said in the Vedas, one should awake andachieve what is due him in this human form of life. This knowledge andmethod is distributed by the sannyasis; hence charity is to be given tothe renouncer of life, to the brahmanas, and similar good causes, notto any whimsical cause.Yasas, fame, should be according to Lord Caitanya, who said that a manis famous when he is known as a great devotee. That is real fame. Ifone has become a great man in Krsna consciousness and it is known, thenhe is truly famous. One who does not have such fame is infamous.All these qualities are manifest throughout the universe in humansociety and in the society of the demigods. There are many forms ofhumanity on other planets, and these qualities are there. Now, for one
who wants to advance in Krsna consciousness, Krsna creates all these
qualities, but the person develops them himself from within. One whoengages in the devotional service of the Supreme Lord develops all thegood qualities, as arranged by the Supreme Lord.Of whatever we find, good or bad, the origin is Krsna. Nothing canmanifest in this material world which is not in Krsna. That isknowledge; although we know that things are differently situated, weshould realize that everything flows from Krsna.
TEXT 6
maharsayah sapta purve
catvaro manavas tathamad-bhava manasa jatayesam loka imah prajah
SYNONYMSmaha-rsayah--the great sages; sapta--seven; purve--before; catvarah--
four; manavah--Manus; tatha--also; mat-bhavah--born of Me; manasah--from the mind; jatah--born; yesam--of them; loke--the planets; imah--all this; prajah--population.
TRANSLATIONThe seven great sages and before them the four other great sages and
the Manus [progenitors of mankind] are born out of My mind, and allcreatures in these planets descend from them.
PURPORTThe Lord is giving a genealogical synopsis of the universal population.
Brahma is the original creature born out of the energy of the SupremeLord known as Hiranyagarbha. And from Brahma all the seven great sages,and before them four other great sages, namely Sanaka, Sananda,Sanatana and Sanat-kumara, and the Manus, are manifest. All thesetwenty-five great sages are known as the patriarchs of the livingentities all over the universe. There are innumerable universes andinnumerable planets within each universe, and each planet is full ofpopulation of different varieties. All of them are born of thesetwenty-five patriarchs. Brahma underwent penance for one thousand yearsof the demigods before he realized by the grace of Krsna how to create.Then from Brahma Sanaka, Sananda, Sanatana and Sanat-kumara came out,then Rudra, and then the seven sages, and in this way all the brahmanasand ksatriyas are born out of the energy of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. Brahma is known as Pitamaha, the grandfather, and Krsna isknown as the Prapitamaha, the father of the grandfather. That is statedin the Eleventh Chapter of the Bhagavad-gita (11.39).
TEXT 7
etam vibhutim yogam ca
mama yo vetti tattvatahso 'vikalpena yogenayujyate natra samsayah
SYNONYMS
etam--all this; vibhutim--opulence; yogam ca--also mystic power; mama--
of Mine; yah--anyone; vetti--knows; tattvatah--factual; sah--he;avikalpena--without division; yogena--in devotional service; yujyate--engaged; na--never; atra--here; samsayah--doubt.
TRANSLATIONHe who knows in truth this glory and power of Mine engages in unalloyed
devotional service; of this there is no doubt.
PURPORTThe highest summit of spiritual perfection is knowledge of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Unless one is firmly convinced of the differentopulences of the Supreme Lord, he cannot engage in devotional service.Generally people know that God is great, but they do not know in detailhow God is great. Here are the details. If one knows factually how Godis great, then naturally he becomes a surrendered soul and engageshimself in the devotional service of the Lord. When one factually knowsthe opulences of the Supreme, there is no alternative but to surrenderto Him. This factual knowledge can be known from the descriptions inSrimad-Bhagavatam and Bhagavad-gita and similar literatures.In the administration of this universe there are many demigodsdistributed throughout the planetary system, and the chief of them areBrahma, Lord Siva and the four great Kumaras and other patriarchs.There are many forefathers of the population of the universe, and allof them are born of the Supreme Lord Krsna. The Supreme Personality ofGodhead Krsna, is the original forefather of all forefathers.These are some of the opulences of the Supreme Lord. When one is firmlyconvinced of them, he accepts Krsna with great faith and without anydoubt, and he engages in devotional service. All this particularknowledge is required in order to increase one's interest in the lovingdevotional service of the Lord. One should not neglect to understandfully how great Krsna is, for by knowing the greatness of Krsna onewill be able to be fixed in sincere devotional service.
TEXT 8
aham sarvasya prabhavo
mattah sarvam pravartateiti matva bhajante mambudha bhava-samanvitah
SYNONYMSaham--I; sarvasya--of all; prabhavah--source of generation; mattah--
from Me; sarvam--everything; pravartate--emanates; iti--thus; matva--knowing; bhajante--becomes devoted; mam--unto Me; budhah--learned;bhava-samanvitah--with great attention.
TRANSLATIONI am the source of all spiritual and material worlds. Everything
emanates from Me. The wise who know this perfectly engage in Mydevotional service and worship Me with all their hearts.
PURPORT
A learned scholar who has studied the Vedas perfectly and has
information from authorities like Lord Caitanya and who knows how toapply these teachings can understand that Krsna is the origin ofeverything in both the material and spiritual worlds, and because heknows this perfectly he becomes firmly fixed in the devotional serviceof the Supreme Lord. He can never be deviated by any amount ofnonsensical commentaries or by fools. All Vedic literature agrees thatKrsna is the source of Brahma, Siva and all other demigods. In theAtharva Veda (Gopala-tapani Upanisad 1.24) it is said, yo brahmanamvidadhati purvam yo vai vedams ca gapayati sma krsnah: "It was Krsnawho in the beginning instructed Brahma in Vedic knowledge and whodisseminated Vedic knowledge in the past." Then again the NarayanaUpanisad says,(1) atha puruso ha vai narayano 'kamayata prajahsrjeyeti: "Then the Supreme Personality Narayana desired to createliving entities." Again it is said, narayanad brahma jayate, narayanadprajapatih prajayate, narayanad indro jayate, narayanad astau vasavojayante, narayanad ekadasa rudra jayante, narayanad dvadasadityah:"From Narayana, Brahma is born, and from Narayana, the patriarchs arealso born. From Narayana, Indra is born, from Narayana the eight Vasusare born, from Narayana the eleven Rudras are born, from Narayana thetwelve Adityas are born."It is said in the same Vedas, brahmanyo devaki-putrah: "The son ofDevaki, Krsna, is the Supreme Personality." (Narayana Upanisad 4) Thenit is said:
eko vai narayana asin na brahma na isano napo nagni samau neme
dyav-aprthivi na naksatrani na suryah sa ekaki na ramate tasyadhyanantah sthasya yatra chandogaih kriyamanastakadi-samjnakastuti-stomah stomam ucyate.
"In the beginning of the creation there was only the Supreme
Personality Narayana. There was no Brahma, no Siva, no fire, no moon,no stars in the sky, no sun. There was only Krsna, who creates all andenjoys all" (Maha Upanisad 1)In the Maha Upanisad it is said that Lord Siva was born from thehighest, the Supreme Lord Krsna, and the Vedas say that it is theSupreme Lord, the creator of Brahma and Siva, who is to be worshiped.In the Moksa-dharma Krsna also says,
prajapatim ca rudram capy
aham eva srjami vaitau hi mam na vijanitomama maya-vimohitau
"The patriarchs, Siva and others are created by Me, though they do not
know that they are created by Me because they are deluded by Myillusory energy." In the Varaha Purana it is also said,
narayanah paro devas
tasmaj jatas caturmukhahtasmad rudro 'bhavad devahsa ca sarva-jnatam gatah
"Narayana is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and from Him Brahma
was born, from whom Siva was born."Lord Krsna is the source of all generations, and He is called the mostefficient cause of everything. He says that because "everything is bornof Me, I am the original source of all. Everything is under Me; no one
is above Me." There is no supreme controller other than Krsna. One who
understands Krsna in such a way from a bona fide spiritual master andfrom Vedic literature, who engages all his energy in Krsnaconsciousness, becomes a truly learned man. In comparison to him, allothers, who do not know Krsna properly, are but fools. Only a foolwould consider Krsna to be an ordinary man. A Krsna conscious personshould not be bewildered by fools; he should avoid all unauthorizedcommentaries and interpretations on Bhagavad-gita and proceed in Krsnaconsciousness with determination and firmness.
TEXT 9
mac-citta mad-gata-prana
bodhayantah parasparamkathayantas ca mam nityamtusyanti ca ramanti ca
SYNONYMSmat-cittah--minds fully engaged in Me; mat-gata-pranah--lives devoted
to the service of Krsna; bodhayantah--preaching; parasparam--amongthemselves; kathayantah ca--talking also; mam--about Me; nityam--perpetually; tusyanti--are pleased; ca--also; ramanti--enjoytranscendental bliss; ca--also.
TRANSLATIONThe thoughts of My pure devotees dwell in Me, their lives are
surrendered to Me, and they derive great satisfaction and blissenlightening one another and conversing about Me.
PURPORTPure devotees, whose characteristics are mentioned here, engage
themselves fully in the transcendental loving service of the Lord.Their minds cannot be diverted from the lotus feet of Krsna. Theirtalks are solely on the transcendental subjects. The symptoms of thepure devotees are described in this verse specifically. Devotees of theSupreme Lord are twenty-four hours daily engaged in glorifying thepastimes of the Supreme Lord. Their hearts and souls are constantlysubmerged in Krsna, and they take pleasure in discussing Him with otherdevotees.In the preliminary stage of devotional service they relish thetranscendental pleasure from the service itself, and in the maturestage they are actually situated in love of God. Once situated in thattranscendental position, they can relish the highest perfection whichis exhibited by the Lord in His abode. Lord Caitanya likenstranscendental devotional service to the sowing of a seed in the heartof the living entity. There are innumerable living entities travelingthroughout the different planets of the universe, and out of them thereare a few who are fortunate enough to meet a pure devotee and get thechance to understand devotional service. This devotional service isjust like a seed, and if it is sown in the heart of a living entity,and if he goes on hearing and chanting, Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, KrsnaKrsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, that seedfructifies, just as the seed of a tree fructifies with regularwatering. The spiritual plant of devotional service gradually grows andgrows until it penetrates the covering of the material universe and
enters into the brahmajyoti effulgence in the spiritual sky. In the
spiritual sky also that plant grows more and more until it reaches thehighest planet, which is called Goloka Vrndavana, the supreme planet ofKrsna. Ultimately, the plant takes shelter under the lotus feet ofKrsna and rests there. Gradually as the plant grows fruits and flowers,that plant of devotional service also produces fruits, and the wateringprocess in the form of chanting and hearing goes on. This plant ofdevotional service is fully described in the Caitanya-caritamrta(Madhya-lila, Chapter Nineteen). It is explained there that when thecomplete plant takes shelter under the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord,one becomes fully absorbed in love of God; then he cannot live even fora moment without being in contact with the Supreme Lord, just as a fishcannot live without water. In such a state, the devotee actuallyattains the transcendental qualities in contact with the Supreme Lord.The Srimad-Bhagavatam is also full of such narrations about therelationship between the Supreme Lord and His devotees; therefore theSrimad-Bhagavatam is very dear to the devotees. In this narration thereis nothing about material activities, sense gratification orliberation. Srimad-Bhagavatam is the only narration in which thetranscendental nature of the Supreme Lord and His devotees is fullydescribed. Thus the realized souls in Krsna consciousness takecontinual pleasure in hearing such transcendental literatures, just asa young boy and girl take pleasure in association.
TEXT 10
tesam satata-yuktanam
bhajatam priti-purvakamdadami buddhi-yogam tamyena mam upayanti te
SYNONYMStesam--unto them; satata-yuktanam--always engaged; bhajatam--in
devotional service; priti-purvakam--in loving ecstasy; dadami--I give;buddhi-yogam--real intelligence; tam--that; yena--by which; mam--untoMe; upayanti--come; te--they.
TRANSLATIONTo those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, I give
the understanding by which they can come to Me.
PURPORTIn this verse the word buddhi-yogam is very significant. We may
remember that in the Second Chapter the Lord, instructing Arjuna, saidthat He had spoken to him of many things and that He would instruct himin the way of buddhi-yoga. Now buddhi-yoga is explained. Buddhi-yogaitself is action in Krsna consciousness; that is the highestintelligence. Buddhi means intelligence, and yoga means mysticactivities or mystic elevation. When one tries to go back home, back toGodhead, and takes fully to Krsna consciousness in devotional service,his action is called buddhi yoga. In other words, buddhi-yoga is theprocess by which one gets out of the entanglement of this materialworld. The ultimate goal of progress is Krsna. People do not know this;therefore the association of devotees and a bona fide spiritual masterare important. One should know that the goal is Krsna, and when the
goal is assigned, then the path is slowly but progressively traversed,
and the ultimate goal is achieved.When a person knows the goal of life but is addicted to the fruits ofactivities, he is acting in karma-yoga. When he knows that the goal isKrsna, but he takes pleasure in mental speculations to understandKrsna, he is acting in jnana-yoga. And when he knows the goal and seeksKrsna completely in Krsna consciousness and devotional service, he isacting in bhakti-yoga, or buddhi-yoga, which is the complete yoga. Thiscomplete yoga is the highest perfectional stage of life.A person may have a bona fide spiritual master and may be attached to aspiritual organization, but still, if he is not intelligent enough tomake progress, then Krsna from within gives him instructions so that hemay ultimately come to Him without difficulty. The qualification isthat a person always engage himself in Krsna consciousness and withlove and devotion render all kinds of services. He should perform somesort of work for Krsna, and that work should be with love. If a devoteeis intelligent enough he will make progress on the path of self-realization. If one is sincere and devoted to the activities ofdevotional service, the Lord gives him a chance to make progress andultimately attain to Him.
TEXT 11
tesam evanukampartham
aham ajnana-jam tamahnasayamy atma-bhavasthojnana-dipena bhasvata
SYNONYMStesam--for them; eva--certainly; anukampa-artham--to show special
mercy; aham--I; ajnana-jam--due to ignorance; tamah--darkness;nasayami--dispel; atma--within; bhavasthah--themselves; jnana--ofknowledge; dipena--with the lamp; bhasvata--glowing.
TRANSLATIONOut of compassion for them, I, dwelling in their hearts, destroy with
the shining lamp of knowledge the darkness born of ignorance.
PURPORTWhen Lord Caitanya was in Benares promulgating the chanting of Hare
Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, RamaRama, Hare Hare, thousands of people were following Him. Prakasananda,a very influential and learned scholar in Benares at that time, deridedLord Caitanya for being a sentimentalist. Sometimes philosopherscriticize the devotees because they think that most of the devotees arein the darkness of ignorance and are philosophically naivesentimentalists. Actually that is not the fact. There are very, verylearned scholars who have put forward the philosophy of devotion, buteven if a devotee does not take advantage of their literatures or ofhis spiritual master, if he is sincere in his devotional service he ishelped by Krsna Himself within his heart. So the sincere devoteeengaged in Krsna consciousness cannot be without knowledge. The onlyqualification is that one carry out devotional service in full Krsnaconsciousness.
The modern philosophers think that without discriminating one cannot
have pure knowledge. For them this answer is given by the Supreme Lord:those who are engaged in pure devotional service, even though they bewithout sufficient education and even without sufficient knowledge ofthe Vedic principles, are still helped by the Supreme God, as stated inthis verse.The Lord tells Arjuna that basically there is no possibility ofunderstanding the Supreme Truth, the Absolute Truth, the SupremePersonality of Godhead, simply by speculating, for the Supreme Truth isso great that it is not possible to understand Him or to achieve Himsimply by making a mental effort. Man can go on speculating for severalmillions of years, and if he is not devoted, if he is not a lover ofthe Supreme Truth, he will never understand Krsna or the Supreme Truth.Only by devotional service is the Supreme Truth, Krsna, pleased and byHis inconceivable energy He can reveal Himself to the heart of the puredevotee. The pure devotee always has Krsna within his heart; thereforehe is just like the sun that dissipates the darkness of ignorance. Thisis the special mercy rendered to the pure devotee by Krsna.Due to the contamination of material association, through many, manymillions of births, one's heart is always covered with the dust ofmaterialism, but when one engages in devotional service and constantlychants Hare Krsna, the dust quickly clears and one is elevated to theplatform of pure knowledge. The ultimate goal of Visnu can be attainedonly by this chant and devotional service, and not by mentalspeculation or argument. The pure devotee does not have to worry aboutthe necessities of life; he need not be anxious because when he removesthe darkness from his heart, everything is provided automatically bythe Supreme Lord, for He is pleased by the loving devotional service ofthe devotee. This is the essence of the Gita's teachings. By studyingBhagavad-gita, one can become a completely surrendered soul to theSupreme Lord and engage himself in pure devotional service. As the Lordtakes charge, one becomes completely free from all kinds ofmaterialistic endeavors.
TEXTS 12-13
arjuna uvaca
param brahma param dhamapavitram paramam bhavanpurusam sasvatam divyamadi-devam ajam vibhum
ahus tvam rsayah sarve
devarsir naradas tathaasito devalo vyasahsvayam caiva bravisi me
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; param--supreme; brahma--truth; param--
supreme; dhama--sustenance; pavitram--purest; paramam--supreme; bhavan--Yourself; purusam--personality; sasvatam--original; divyam--transcendental; adi-devam--original Lord; ajam--unborn; vibhum--greatest; ahuh--say; tvam--unto You; rsayah--sages; sarve--all; deva-rsih--the sage among the demigods; naradah--Narada; tatha--also;asitah--Asita; devalah--Devala; vyasah--Vyasa; svayam--personally; ca--also; eva--certainly; bravisi--explaining; me--unto me.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: You are the Supreme Brahman, the ultimate, the supreme
abode and purifier, the Absolute Truth and the eternal divine person.You are the primal God, transcendental and original, and You are theunborn and all-pervading beauty. All the great sages such as Narada,Asita, Devala, and Vyasa proclaim this of You, and now You Yourself aredeclaring it to me.
PURPORTIn these two verses the Supreme Lord gives a chance to the modern
philosopher, for here it is clear that the Supreme is different fromthe individual soul. Arjuna, after hearing the essential four verses ofBhagavad-gita in this chapter, became completely free from all doubtsand accepted Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He at onceboldly declares, "You are param brahma, the Supreme Personality ofGodhead." And previously Krsna stated that He is the originator ofeverything and everyone. Every demigod and every human being isdependent on Him. Men and demigods, out of ignorance, think that theyare absolute and independent of the Supreme Lord Krsna. That ignoranceis removed perfectly by the discharge of devotional service. This isalready explained in the previous verse by the Lord. Now by His grace,Arjuna is accepting Him as the Supreme Truth, in concordance with theVedic injunction. It is not because Krsna is an intimate friend ofArjuna that he is flattering Him by calling Him the Supreme Personalityof Godhead, the Absolute Truth. Whatever Arjuna says in these twoverses is confirmed by Vedic truth. Vedic injunctions affirm that onlyone who takes to devotional service to the Supreme Lord can understandHim, whereas others cannot. Each and every word of this verse spoken byArjuna is confirmed by Vedic injunction.In the Kena Upanisad it is stated that the Supreme Brahman is the restfor everything, and Krsna has already explained that everything isresting on Him. The Mundaka Upanisad confirms that the Supreme Lord, inwhom everything is resting, can be realized only by those who engageconstantly in thinking of Him. This constant thinking of Krsna issmaranam, one of the methods of devotional service. It is only bydevotional service to Krsna that one can understand his position andget rid of this material body.In the Vedas the Supreme Lord is accepted as the purest of the pure.One who understands that Krsna is the purest of the pure can becomepurified from all sinful activities. One cannot be disinfected fromsinful activities unless he surrenders unto the Supreme Lord. Arjuna'sacceptance of Krsna as the supreme pure complies with the injunctionsof Vedic literature. This is also confirmed by great personalities, ofwhom Narada is the chief.Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and one should alwaysmeditate upon Him and enjoy one's transcendental relationship with Him.He is the supreme existence. He is free from bodily needs, birth anddeath. Not only does Arjuna confirm this, but all the Vedicliteratures, the Puranas and histories. In all Vedic literatures Krsnais thus described, and the Supreme Lord Himself also says in the FourthChapter, "Although I am unborn, I appear on this earth to establishreligious principles." He is the supreme origin; He has no cause, forHe is the cause of all causes, and everything is emanating from Him.This perfect knowledge can be had by the grace of the Supreme Lord.Here Arjuna expresses himself through the grace of Krsna. If we want tounderstand Bhagavad-gita, we should accept the statements in these two
verses. This is called the parampara system, acceptance of the
disciplic succession. Unless one is in the disciplic succession, hecannot understand Bhagavad-gita. It is not possible by so-calledacademic education. Unfortunately those proud of their academiceducation, despite so much evidence in Vedic literatures, stick totheir obstinate conviction that Krsna is an ordinary person.
TEXT 14
sarvam etad rtam manye
yan mam vadasi kesavana hi te bhagavan vyaktimvidur deva na danavah
SYNONYMSsarvam--all; etat--these; rtam--truths; manye--accept; yat--which; mam-
-unto me; vadasi--You tell; kesava--O Krsna; na--never; hi--certainly;te--Your; bhagavan--O Personality of Godhead; vyaktim--revelation;viduh--can know; devah--the demigods; na--nor; danavah--the demons.
TRANSLATIONO Krsna, I totally accept as truth all that You have told me. Neither
the gods nor demons, O Lord, know Thy personality.
PURPORTArjuna herein confirms that persons of faithless and demonic nature
cannot understand Krsna. He is not even known by the demigods, so whatto speak of the so-called scholars of this modern world? By the graceof the Supreme Lord, Arjuna has understood that the Supreme Truth isKrsna and that He is the perfect one. One should therefore follow thepath of Arjuna. He received the authority of Bhagavad-gita. Asdescribed in the Fourth Chapter, the parampara system of disciplicsuccession for the understanding of Bhagavad-gita was lost, andtherefore Krsna reestablished that disciplic succession with Arjunabecause He considered Arjuna His intimate friend and a great devotee.Therefore, as stated in our Introduction to Gitopanisad, Bhagavad-gitashould be understood in the parampara system. When the parampara systemwas lost, Arjuna was again selected to rejuvenate it. The acceptance ofArjuna of all that Krsna says should be emulated; then we canunderstand the essence of Bhagavad-gita, and then only can weunderstand that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 15
svayam evatmanatmanam
vettha tvam purusottamabhuta-bhavana bhutesadeva-deva jagat-pate
SYNONYMSsvayam--personality; eva--certainly; atmana--by Yourself; atmanam--
Yourself; vettha--know; tvam--You; purusa-uttama--O greatest of allpersons; bhuta-bhavana--O origin of everything; bhuta-isa--O Lord of
everything; deva-deva--O Lord of all demigods; jagat-pate--O Lord of
the entire universe.
TRANSLATIONIndeed, You alone know Yourself by Your own potencies, O origin of all,
Lord of all beings, God of gods, O Supreme Person, Lord of theuniverse!
PURPORTThe Supreme Lord Krsna can be known by persons who are in a
relationship with Him through the discharge of devotional service, likeArjuna and his followers. Persons of demonic or atheistic mentalitycannot know Krsna. Mental speculation that leads one away from theSupreme Lord is a serious sin, and one who does not know Krsna shouldnot try to comment on Bhagavad-gita. Bhagavad-gita is the statement ofKrsna, and since it is the science of Krsna, it should be understoodfrom Krsna as Arjuna understood it. It should not be received fromatheistic persons.The Supreme Truth is realized in three aspects: as impersonal Brahman,localized Paramatma and at last as the Supreme Personality of Godhead.So at the last stage of understanding the Absolute Truth, one comes tothe Supreme Personality of Godhead. A liberated man and even a commonman may realize impersonal Brahman or localized Paramatma, yet they maynot understand God's personality from the verses of Bhagavad-gita,which are being spoken by this person, Krsna. Sometimes theimpersonalists accept Krsna as Bhagavan, or they accept His authority.Yet many liberated persons cannot understand Krsna as Purusottama, theSupreme Person, the father of all living entities. Therefore Arjunaaddresses Him as Purusottama. And if one comes to know Him as thefather of all the living entities, still one may not know Him as thesupreme controller; therefore He is addressed here as Bhutesa, thesupreme controller of everyone. And even if one knows Krsna as thesupreme controller of all living entities, still one may not know thatHe is the origin of all the demigods; therefore He is addressed hereinas Devadeva, the worshipful God of all demigods. And even if one knowsHim as the worshipful God of all demigods, one may not know that He isthe supreme proprietor of everything; therefore He is addressed asJagatpati. Thus the truth about Krsna is established in this verse bythe realization of Arjuna, and we should follow in the footsteps ofArjuna to understand Krsna as He is.
TEXT 16
vaktum arhasy asesena
divya hy atma-vibhutayahyabhir vibhutibhir lokanimams tvam vyapya tisthasi
SYNONYMSvaktum--to say; arhasi--deserve; asesena--in detail; divyah--divine;
hi--certainly; atma--Yourself; vibhutayah--opulences; yabhih--by which;vibhutibhih--opulences; lokan--all the planets; iman--these; tvam--You;vyapya--pervading; tisthasi--remain.
TRANSLATION
Please tell me in detail of Your divine powers by which You pervade all
these worlds and abide in them.
PURPORTIn this verse it appears that Arjuna is already satisfied with his
understanding of the Supreme Lord Krsna. By Krsna's grace, Arjuna haspersonal experience, intelligence and knowledge and whatever else aperson may have through all these agencies, and he has understood Krsnaas the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For him there is no doubt, yethe is asking Krsna to explain His all-pervading nature so that in thefuture people will understand, especially the impersonalists, how Heexists in His all-pervading aspect through His different energies. Oneshould know that this is being asked by Arjuna on behalf of the commonpeople.
TEXT 17
katham vidyam aham yogims
tvam sada paricintayankesu kesu ca bhavesucintyo 'si bhagavan maya
SYNONYMSkatham--how; vidyam aham--shall I know; yogin--O supreme mystic; tvam--
You; sada--always; paricintayan--thinking; kesu--in which; kesu--inwhich; ca--also; bhavesu--nature; cintyah asi--You are remembered;bhagavan--O Supreme; maya--by me.
TRANSLATIONHow shall I meditate on You? In what various forms are You to be
remembered, O Blessed Lord?
PURPORTAs it is stated in the previous chapter, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is covered by His yoga-maya. Only surrendered souls anddevotees can see Him. Now Arjuna is convinced that His friend, Krsna,is the Supreme Godhead, but he wants to know the general process bywhich the all-pervading Lord can be understood by the common man. Nocommon men, including the demons and atheists, can know Krsna becauseHe is guarded by His yoga-maya energy. Again, these questions are askedby Arjuna for their benefit. The superior devotee is not only concernedfor his own understanding, but for the understanding of all mankind.Out of his mercy, because he is a Vaisnava, a devotee, Arjuna isopening the understanding for the common man as far as the all-pervasiveness of the Supreme is concerned. He addresses Krsnaspecifically as yogin because Sri Krsna is the master of the yoga-mayaenergy by which He is covered and uncovered to the common man. Thecommon man who has no love for Krsna cannot always think of Krsna;therefore he has to think materially. Arjuna is considering the mode ofthinking of the materialistic persons of this world. Becausematerialists cannot understand Krsna spiritually, they are advised toconcentrate the mind on physical things and try to see how Krsna ismanifested by physical representations.
TEXT 18
vistarenatmano yogam
vibhutim ca janardanabhuyah kathaya trptir hisrnvato nasti me 'mrtam
SYNONYMSvistarena--in description; atmanah--of Yourself; yogam--mystic power;
vibhutim--opulences; ca--also; jana-ardana--O killer of the atheists;bhuyah--again; kathaya--describe; trptih--satisfaction; hi--certainly;srnvatah--hearing; na asti--there is not; me--my; amrtam--nectar.
TRANSLATIONTell me again in detail, O Janardana [Krsna], of Your mighty potencies
and glories, for I never tire of hearing Your ambrosial words.
PURPORTA similar statement was made to Suta Gosvami by the rsis of
Naimisaranya, headed by Saunaka. That statement is:
vayam tu na vitrpyama
uttama-sloka-vikrameyac chrnvatam rasa-jnanamsvadu svadu pade pade
"One can never be satiated even though one continuously hears the
transcendental pastimes of Krsna, who is glorified by Vedic hymns.Those who have entered into a transcendental relationship with Krsnarelish in every step descriptions of the pastimes of the Lord."(Srimad-Bhagavatam 1.1.19) Thus Arjuna is interested to hear aboutKrsna, specifically how He remains as the all-pervading Supreme Lord.Now as far as amrtam, nectar, is concerned, any narration or statementconcerning Krsna is just like nectar. And this nectar can be perceivedby practical experience. Modern stories, fiction and histories aredifferent from the transcendental pastimes of the Lord in that one willtire of hearing mundane stories, but one never tires of hearing aboutKrsna. It is for this reason only that the history of the wholeuniverse is replete with references to the pastimes of the incarnationsof Godhead. For instance, the Puranas are histories of bygone ages thatrelate the pastimes of the various incarnations of the Lord. In thisway the reading matter remains forever fresh, despite repeatedreadings.
TEXT 19
sri-bhagavan uvaca
hanta te kathayisyamidivya hy atma-vibhutayahpradhanyatah kuru-sresthanasty anto vistarasya me
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; hanta--
yes; te--unto you; kathayisyami--I shall speak; divyah--divine; hi--certainly; atma-vibhutayah--personal opulences; pradhanyatah--principally; kuru-srestha--O best of the Kurus; na asti--there is no;antah--limit; vistarasya--to the extent; me--My.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: Yes, I will tell you of My splendorous
manifestations, but only of those which are prominent, O Arjuna, for Myopulence is limitless.
PURPORTIt is not possible to comprehend the greatness of Krsna and His
opulences. The senses of the individual soul are imperfect and do notpermit him to understand the totality of Krsna's affairs. Still thedevotees try to understand Krsna, but not on the principle that theywill be able to understand Krsna fully at any specific time or in anystate of life. Rather, the very topics of Krsna are so relishable thatthey appear to them as nectar. Thus they enjoy them. In discussingKrsna's opulences and His diverse energies, the pure devotees taketranscendental pleasure. Therefore they want to hear and discuss them.Krsna knows that living entities do not understand the extent of Hisopulences; He therefore agrees to state only the principalmanifestations of His different energies. The word pradhanyatah(principal) is very important because we can understand only a few ofthe principal details of the Supreme Lord, for His features areunlimited. It is not possible to understand them all. And vibhuti, asused in this verse, refers to the opulences by which He controls thewhole manifestation. In the Amara-kosa dictionary it is stated thatvibhuti indicates an exceptional opulence.The impersonalist or the pantheist cannot understand the exceptionalopulences of the Supreme Lord nor the manifestations of His divineenergy. Both in the material world and in the spiritual world Hisenergies are distributed in every variety of manifestation. Now Krsnais describing what can be directly perceived by the common man; thuspart of His variegated energy is described in this way.
TEXT 20
aham atma gudakesa
sarva-bhutasaya-sthitahaham adis ca madhyam cabhutanam anta eva ca
SYNONYMSaham--I; atma--soul; gudakesa--O Arjuna; sarva-bhuta--all living
entities; asaya-sthitah--situated within; aham--I am; adih--origin; ca--also; madhyam--middle; ca--also; bhutanam--all living entities; antah--end; eva--certainly; ca--and.
TRANSLATIONI am the Self, O Gudakesa, seated in the hearts of all creatures. I am
the beginning, the middle and the end of all beings.
PURPORT
In this verse Arjuna is addressed as Gudakesa, which means one who has
conquered the darkness of sleep. For those who are sleeping in thedarkness of ignorance it is not possible to understand how the SupremePersonality of Godhead manifests Himself in the material and spiritualworlds. Thus this address by Krsna to Arjuna is significant. BecauseArjuna is above such darkness, the Personality of Godhead agrees todescribe His various opulences.Krsna first informs Arjuna that He is the Self or soul of the entirecosmic manifestation by dint of His primary expansion. Before thematerial creation, the Supreme Lord, by His plenary expansion, acceptsthe purusa incarnations, and from Him everything begins. Therefore Heis atma, the soul of the mahat-tattva, the universal elements. Thetotal material energy is not the cause of the creation but actually theMaha-Visnu enters into the mahat-tattva, the total material energy. Heis the soul. When Maha-Visnu enters into the manifested universes, Heagain manifests Himself as the Supersoul in each and every entity. Wehave experience that the personal body of the living entity exists dueto the presence of the spiritual spark. Without the existence of thespiritual spark, the body cannot develop. Similarly, the materialmanifestation cannot develop unless the Supreme Soul of Krsna enters.The Supreme Personality of Godhead is existing as the Supersoul in allmanifested universes. A description of the three purusa-avataras isgiven in Srimad-Bhagavatam: "The Supreme Personality of Godheadmanifests three features, as Karanodakasayi Visnu, Garbhodakasayi Visnuand Ksirodakasayi Visnu, in this material manifestation." The SupremeLord, Krsna, the cause of all causes, lies down in the cosmic ocean asMaha-Visnu or Karanodakasayi Visnu, and therefore Krsna is thebeginning of this universe, the maintainer of the universalmanifestation, and the end of all the energy.
TEXT 21
adityanam aham visnur
jyotisam ravir amsumanmaricir marutam asminaksatranam aham sasi
SYNONYMSadityanam--of the Adityas; aham--I am; visnuh--the Supreme Lord;
jyotisam--of all luminaries; ravih--the sun; amsu-man--radiant;maricih--Marici; marutam--of the Maruts; asmi--I am; naksatranam--ofstars; aham--I am; sasi--the moon.
TRANSLATIONOf the Adityas I am Visnu, of lights I am the radiant sun, I am Marici
of the Maruts, and among the stars I am the moon.
PURPORTThere are twelve Adityas, of which Krsna is the principal. And among
all the luminaries twinkling in the sky, the sun is the chief, and inthe Brahma-samhita the sun is accepted as the glowing effulgence of theSupreme Lord and is considered to be one of His eyes. Marici is the
controlling deity of of the heavenly spaces. Among the stars, the moon
is the most prominent at night, and thus the moon represents Krsna.TEXT 22
vedanam sama-vedo 'smi
devanam asmi vasavahindriyanam manas casmibhutanam asmi cetana
SYNONYMSvedanam--of all the Vedas; sama-vedah--the Sama Veda; asmi--I am;
devanam--of all the demigods; asmi--I am; vasavah--heavenly king;indriyanam--of all the senses; manah--the mind; ca--also; asmi--I am;bhutanam--of all living entities; asmi--I am; cetana--the living force.
TRANSLATIONOf the Vedas I am the Sama Veda; of the demigods I am Indra; of the
senses I am the mind, and in living beings I am the living force[knowledge].
PURPORTThe difference between matter and spirit is that matter has no
consciousness like the living entity; therefore this consciousness issupreme and eternal. Consciousness cannot be produced by a combinationof matter.
TEXT 23
rudranam sankaras casmi
vitteso yaksa-raksasamvasunam pavakas casmimeruh sikharinam aham
SYNONYMSrudranam--of all the Rudras; sankarah--Lord Siva; ca--also; asmi--I am;
vitta-isah--the lord of the treasury of the demigods; yaksa-raksasam--of the Yaksas and Raksasas; vasunam--of the Vasus; pavakah--fire; ca--also; asmi--I am; meruh--Meru; sikharinam--of all mountains; aham--Iam.
TRANSLATIONOf all the Rudras I am Lord Siva; of the Yaksas and Raksasas I am the
Lord of wealth [Kuvera]; of the Vasus I am fire [Agni], and ofmountains I am Meru.
PURPORTThere are eleven Rudras, of whom Sankara, Lord Siva, is predominant. He
is the incarnation of the Supreme Lord in charge of the mode ofignorance in the universe. Among the demigods Kuvera is the chieftreasurer, and he is a representation of the Supreme Lord. Meru is amountain famed for its rich natural resources.
TEXT 24
purodhasam ca mukhyam mam
viddhi partha brhaspatimsenaninam aham skandahsarasam asmi sagarah
SYNONYMSpurodhasam--of all priests; ca--also; mukhyam--chief; mam--Me; viddhi--
understand; partha--O son of Prtha; brhaspatim--Brhaspati; senaninam--of all commanders; aham--I am; skandah--Kartikeya; sarasam--of allreservoirs of water; asmi--I am; sagarah--the ocean.
TRANSLATIONOf priests, O Arjuna, know Me to be the chief, Brhaspati, the lord of
devotion. Of generals I am Skanda, the lord of war; and of bodies ofwater I am the ocean.
PURPORTIndra is the chief demigod of the heavenly planets and is known as the
king of the heavens. The planet in which he reigns is called Indraloka.Brhaspati is Indra's priest, and since Indra is the chief of all kings,Brhaspati is the chief of all priests. And as Indra is the chief of allkings, similarly Skanda the son of Parvati and Lord Siva, is the chiefof all military commanders. And of all bodies of water, the ocean isthe greatest. These representations of Krsna only give hints of Hisgreatness.
TEXT 25
maharsinam bhrgur aham
giram asmy ekam aksaramyajnanam japa-yajno 'smisthavaranam himalayah
SYNONYMSmaha-rsinam--among the great sages; bhrguh--Bhrgu; aham--I am; giram--
of vibrations; asmi--I am; ekam aksaram--pranava; yajnanam--ofsacrifices; japa-yajnah--chanting; asmi--I am; sthavaranam--ofimmovable things; himalayah--the Himalayan mountains.
TRANSLATIONOf the great sages I am Bhrgu; of vibrations I am the transcendental
om. Of sacrifices I am the chanting of the holy names [japa], and ofimmovable things I am the Himalayas.
PURPORTBrahma, the first living creature within the universe, created several
sons for the propagation of various kinds of species. The most powerfulof his sons is Bhrgu, who is also the greatest sage. Of all thetranscendental vibrations, the om (omkara) represents the Supreme. Ofall sacrifices, the chanting of Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna,
Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare is the purest
representation of Krsna. Sometimes animal sacrifices are recommended,but in the sacrifice of Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, there is no question ofviolence. It is the simplest and the purest. Whatever is sublime in theworlds is a representation of Krsna. Therefore the Himalayas, thegreatest mountains in the world, also represent Him. The mountain namedMeru was mentioned in a previous verse, but Meru is sometimes movable,whereas the Himalayas are never movable. Thus the Himalayas are greaterthan Meru.
TEXT 26
asvatthah sarva-vrksanam
devarsinam ca naradahgandharvanam citrarathahsiddhanam kapilo munih
SYNONYMSasvatthah--the banyan tree; sarva-vrksanam--of all trees; deva-rsinam--
of all the sages amongst the demigods; ca--and; naradah--Narada;gandharvanam--the citizens of the Gandharva planet; citrarathah--Citraratha; siddhanam--of all those who are perfected; kapilah munih--Kapila Muni.
TRANSLATIONOf all trees I am the holy fig tree, and among sages and demigods I am
Narada. Of singers of the gods [Gandharvas] I am Citraratha, and amongperfected beings I am the sage Kapila.
PURPORTThe fig tree (asvattha) is one of the most beautiful and highest trees,
and people in India often worship it as one of their daily morningrituals. Amongst the demigods they also worship Narada, who isconsidered the greatest devotee in the universe. Thus he is therepresentation of Krsna as a devotee. The Gandharva planet is filledwith entities who sing beautifully, and among them the best singer isCitraratha. Amongst the perpetually living entities, Kapila isconsidered an incarnation of Krsna, and His philosophy is mentioned inthe Srimad-Bhagavatam. Later on another Kapila became famous, but hisphilosophy was atheistic. Thus there is a gulf of difference betweenthem.
TEXT 27
uccaihsravasam asvanam
viddhi mam amrtodbhavamairavatam gajendranamnaranam ca naradhipam
SYNONYMSuccaihsravasam--Uccaihsrava; asvanam--among horses; viddhi--know; mam--
Me; amrta-udbhavam--produced from the churning of the ocean; airavatam--Airavata; gaja-indranam--of elephants; naranam--among human beings;ca--and; nara-adhipam--the king.
TRANSLATION
Of horses know Me to be Uccaihsrava, who rose out of the ocean, born of
the elixir of immortality; of lordly elephants I am Airavata, and amongmen I am the monarch.
PURPORTThe devotee demigods and the demons (asuras) once took a sea journey.
On this journey, nectar and poison were produced, and Lord Siva drankthe poison. From the nectar were produced many entities, of which therewas a horse named Uccaihsrava. Another animal produced from the nectarwas an elephant named Airavata. Because these two animals were producedfrom nectar, they have special significance, and they arerepresentatives of Krsna.Amongst the human beings the king is the representative of Krsnabecause Krsna is the maintainer of the universe, and the kings, who areappointed on account of their godly qualifications, are maintainers oftheir kingdoms. Kings like Maharaja Yudhisthira, Maharaja Pariksit andLord Rama were all highly righteous kings who always thought of thecitizens' welfare. In Vedic literature, the king is considered to bethe representative of God. In this age, however, with the corruption ofthe principles of religion, monarchy decayed and is now finallyabolished. It is to be understood that in the past, however, peoplewere more happy under righteous kings.
TEXT 28
ayudhanam aham vajram
dhenunam asmi kamadhukprajanas casmi kandarpahsarpanam asmi vasukih
SYNONYMSayudhanam--of all weapons; aham--I am; vajram--the thunderbolt;
dhenunam--of cows; asmi--I am; kama-dhuk--the surabhi cows; prajanah--for begetting children; ca--and; asmi--I am; kandarpah--Cupid;sarpanam--of all snakes; asmi--I am; vasukih--Vasuki.
TRANSLATIONOf weapons I am the thunderbolt; among cows I am the surabhi, givers of
abundant milk. Of procreators I am Kandarpa, the god of love, and ofserpents I am Vasuki, the chief.
PURPORTThe thunderbolt, indeed a mighty weapon, represents Krsna's power. In
Krsnaloka in the spiritual sky there are cows which can be milked atany time, and they give as much milk as one likes. Of course such cowsdo not exist in this material world, but there is mention of them inKrsnaloka. The Lord keeps many such cows, which are called surabhi. Itis stated that the Lord is engaged in herding the surabhi cows.Kandarpa is the sex desire for presenting good sons; therefore Kandarpais the representative of Krsna. Sometimes sex is engaged in only for
sense gratification; such sex does not represent Krsna. But sex for the
generation of good children is called Kandarpa and represents Krsna.
TEXT 29
anantas casmi naganam
varuno yadasam ahampitrnam aryama casmiyamah samyamatam aham
SYNONYMSanantah--Ananta; ca--also; asmi--I am; naganam--of all serpents;
varunah--the demigod controlling the water; yadasam--of all aquatics;aham--I am; pitrnam--of the ancestors; aryama--Aryama; ca--also; asmi--I am; yamah--the controller of death; samyamatam--of all regulators;aham--I am.
TRANSLATIONOf the celestial Naga snakes I am Ananta; of the aquatic deities I am
Varuna. Of departed ancestors I am Aryama, and among the dispensers oflaw I am Yama, lord of death.
PURPORTAmong the many celestial Naga serpents, Ananta is the greatest, as is
Varuna among the aquatics. They both represent Krsna. There is also aplanet of Pitas, ancestors, presided over by Aryama, who representsKrsna. There are many living entities who give punishment to themiscreants, and among them Yama is the chief. Yama is situated in aplanet near this earthly planet, and after death those who are verysinful are taken there, and Yama arranges different kinds ofpunishments for them.
TEXT 30
prahladas casmi daityanam
kalah kalayatam ahammrganam ca mrgendro 'hamvainateyas ca paksinam
SYNONYMSprahladah--Prahlada; ca--also; asmi--I am; daityanam--of the demons;
kalah--time; kalayatam--of subduers; aham--I am; mrganam--of animals;ca--and; mrga-indrah--the lion; aham--I am; vainateyah--Garuda; ca--also; paksinam--of birds.
TRANSLATIONAmong the Daitya demons I am the devoted Prahlada; among subduers I am
time; among beasts I am the lion, and among birds I am Garuda, thefeathered carrier of Visnu.
PURPORT
Diti and Aditi are two sisters. The sons of Aditi are called Adityas,
and the sons of Diti are called Daityas. All the Adityas are devoteesof the Lord, and all the Daityas are atheistic. Although Prahlada wasborn in the family of the Daityas, he was a great devotee from hischildhood. Because of his devotional service and godly nature, he isconsidered to be a representative of Krsna.There are many subduing principles, but time wears down all things inthe material universe and so represents Krsna. Of the many animals, thelion is the most powerful and ferocious, and of the million varietiesof birds, Garuda, the bearer of Lord Visnu, is the greatest.
TEXT 31
pavanah pavatam asmi
ramah sastra-bhrtam ahamjhasanam makaras casmisrotasam asmi jahnavi
SYNONYMSpavanah--the wind; pavatam--of all that purifies; asmi--I am; ramah--
Rama; sastra-bhrtam--of the carriers of weapons; aham--I am; jhasanam--of all aquatics; makarah--shark; ca asmi--I am also; srotasam--offlowing rivers; asmi--I am; jahnavi--the River Ganges.
TRANSLATIONOf purifiers I am the wind; of the wielders of weapons I am Rama; of
fishes I am the shark, and of flowing rivers I am the Ganges.
PURPORTOf all the aquatics the shark is one of the biggest and is certainly
the most dangerous to man. Thus the shark represents Krsna. And ofrivers, the greatest in India is the Mother Ganges. Lord Ramacandra, ofthe Ramayana, an incarnation of Krsna, is the mightest of warriors.
TEXT 32
sarganam adir antas ca
madhyam caivaham arjunaadhyatma-vidya vidyanamvadah pravadatam aham
SYNONYMSsarganam--of all creations; adih--beginning; antah--end; ca--and;
madhyam--middle; ca--also; eva--certainly; aham--I am; arjuna--OArjuna; adhyatma-vidya--spiritual knowledge; vidyanam--of alleducation; vadah--natural conclusion; pravadatam--of arguments; aham--Iam.
TRANSLATIONOf all creations I am the beginning and the end and also the middle, O
Arjuna. Of all sciences I am the spiritual science of the self, andamong logicians I am the conclusive truth.
PURPORT
Among created manifestations, the total material elements are first
created by Maha-Visnu and are annihilated by Lord Siva. Brahma is asecondary creator. All these created elements are differentincarnations of the material qualities of the Supreme Lord; thereforeHe is the beginning, the middle and the end of all creation.Regarding the spiritual science of the self, there are manyliteratures, such as the four Vedas, the Vedanta-sutra and the Puranas,the Srimad Bhagavatam and the Gita. These are all representatives ofKrsna. Among logicians there are different stages of argument. Thepresentation of evidence is called jalpa. The attempt to defeat oneanother is called vitanda, and the final conclusion is called vada. Theconclusive truth, the end of all reasoning processes, is Krsna.
TEXT 33
aksaranam akaro 'smi
dvandvah samasikasya caaham evaksayah kalodhataham visvato-mukhah
SYNONYMSaksaranam--of letters; akarah--the first; asmi--I am; dvandvah--dual;
samasikasya--compounds; ca--and; aham--I am; eva--certainly; aksayah--eternal; kalah--time; dhata--creator; aham--I am; visvatah-mukhah--Brahma.
TRANSLATIONOf letters I am the letter A, and among compound words I am the dual
compound. I am also inexhaustible time, and of creators I am Brahma,whose manifold faces turn everywhere.
PURPORTAkara, the first letter of the Sanskrit alphabet, is the beginning of
the Vedic literature. Without akara, nothing can be sounded; thereforeit is the beginning of sound. In Sanskrit there are also many compoundwords, of which the dual word, like Rama-krsna, is called dvandva. Forinstance, Rama and Krsna have the same rhythm, and therefore are calleddual.Among all kinds of killers, time is the ultimate because time killseverything. Time is the representative of Krsna because in due courseof time there will be a great fire and everything will be annihilated.Among the creators and living entities, Brahma is the chief. Thevarious Brahma's exhibit four, eight, sixteen, etc., heads accordingly,and they are the chief creators in their respective universes. TheBrahmas are representatives of Krsna.
TEXT 34
mrtyuh sarva-haras caham
udbhavas ca bhavisyatamkirtih srir vak ca narinamsmrtir medha dhrtih ksama
SYNONYMS
mrtyuh--death; sarva-harah--all-devouring; ca--also; aham--I am;
udbhavah--generation; ca--also; bhavisyatam--of the future; kirtih--fame; srih vak--beautiful speech; ca--also; narinam--of women; smrtih--memory; medha--intelligence; dhrtih--faithfulness; ksama--patience.
TRANSLATIONI am all-devouring death, and I am the generator of all things yet to
be. Among women I am fame, fortune, speech, memory, intelligence,faithfulness and patience.
PURPORTAs soon as a man is born, he dies at every moment. Thus death is
devouring every living entity at every moment, but the last stroke iscalled death itself. That death is Krsna. All species of life undergosix basic changes. They are born, they grow, they remain for some time,they reproduce, they dwindle and finally they vanish. Of these changes,the first is deliverance from the womb, and that is Krsna. The firstgeneration is the beginning of all future activities.The seven opulences listed are considered to be feminine. If a womanpossesses all of them or some of them she becomes glorious. Sanskrit isa perfect language and is therefore very glorious. After studying, ifone can remember the subject matter, he is gifted with a good memory,or smrti. One need not read many books on different subject matters;the ability to remember a few and quote them when necessary is anotheropulence.
TEXT 35
brhat-sama tatha samnam
gayatri chandasam ahammasanam marga-sirso 'hamrtunam kusumakarah
SYNONYMSbrhat-sama--the Brhat-sama; tatha--also; samnam--of the Sama Veda
songs; gayatri--the Gayatri hymns; chandasam--of all poetry; aham--Iam; masanam--of months; marga-sirsah--the month of November-December;aham--I am; rtunam--of all seasons; kusuma-akarah--spring.
TRANSLATIONOf hymns I am the Brhat-sama sung to the Lord Indra, and of poetry I am
the Gayatri verse, sung daily by Brahmanas. Of months I am November andDecember, and of seasons I am flower-bearing spring.
PURPORTIt has already been explained by the Lord that amongst all the Vedas,
the Sama Veda is rich with beautiful songs played by the variousdemigods. One of these songs is the Brhat-sama, which has an exquisitemelody and is sung at midnight.In Sanskrit there are definite rules that regulate poetry; rhyme andmeter are not written whimsically, as in much modern poetry. Amongst
the regulated poetry, the Gayatri mantra, which is chanted by the duly
qualified brahmanas, is the most prominent. The Gayatri mantra ismentioned in the Srimad-Bhagavatam. Because the Gayatri mantra isespecially meant for God realization, it represents the Supreme Lord.This mantra is meant for spiritually advanced people, and when oneattains success in chanting it, he can enter into the transcendentalposition of the Lord. One must first acquire the qualities of theperfectly situated person, the qualities of goodness according to thelaws of material nature, in order to chant the Gayatri mantra. TheGayatri mantra is very important in Vedic civilization and isconsidered to be the sound incarnation of Brahman. Brahma is itsinitiator, and it is passed down from him in disciplic succession.The months of November and December are considered the best of allmonths because in India grains are collected from the fields at thistime, and the people become very happy. Of course spring is a seasonuniversally liked because it is neither too hot nor too cold, and theflowers and trees blossom and flourish. In spring there are also manyceremonies commemorating Krsna's pastimes; therefore this is consideredto be the most joyful of all seasons, and it is the representative ofthe Supreme Lord, Krsna.
TEXT 36
dyutam chalayatam asmi
tejas tejasvinam ahamjayo 'smi vyavasayo 'smisattvam sattvavatam aham
SYNONYMSdyutam--gambling; chalayatam--of all cheats; asmi--I am; tejah--
splendid; tejasvinam--of everything splendid; aham--I am; jayah--victory; asmi--I am; vyavasayah--adventure; asmi--I am; sattvam--strength; sattva-vatam--of all the strong; aham--I am.
TRANSLATIONI am also the gambling of cheats, and of the splendid I am the
splendor. I am victory, I am adventure, and I am the strength of thestrong.
PURPORTThere are many kinds of cheaters all over the universe. Of all cheating
processes, gambling stands supreme and therefore represents Krsna. Asthe Supreme, Krsna can be more deceitful than any mere man. If Krsnachooses to deceive a person, no one can surpass Him in His deceit. Hisgreatness is not simply one-sided--it is all-sided.Among the victorious, He is victory. He is the splendor of thesplendid. Among enterprising industrialists, He is the mostenterprising, the most industrious. Among adventurers, He is the mostadventurous, and among the strong He is the strongest. When Krsna waspresent on earth, no one could surpass Him in strength. Even in Hischildhood He lifted Govardhana Hill. No one can surpass Him incheating, no one can surpass Him in splendor, no one can surpass Him invictory, no one can surpass Him in enterprise, and no one can surpassHim in strength.
TEXT 37
vrsninam vasudevo 'smi
pandavanam dhananjayahmuninam apy aham vyasahkavinam usana kavih
SYNONYMSvrsninam--of the descendants of Vrsni; vasudevah--Krsna in Dvaraka;
asmi--I am; pandavanam--of the Pandavas; dhananjayah--Arjuna; muninam--of the sages; api--also; aham--I am; vyasah--Vyasa, the compiler of allVedic literature; kavinam--of all great thinkers; usana--Usana; kavih--the thinker.
TRANSLATIONOf the descendants of Vrsni I am Vasudeva, and of the Pandavas I am
Arjuna. Of the sages I am Vyasa, and among great thinkers I am Usana.
PURPORTKrsna is the original Supreme Personality of Godhead, and Vasudeva is
the immediate expansion of Krsna. Both Lord Krsna and Baladeva appearas the sons of Vasudeva. Amongst the sons of Pandu, Arjuna is famousand valiant. Indeed, He is the best of men and therefore representsKrsna. Among the munis, or learned men conversant in Vedic knowledge,Vyasa is the greatest because he explained Vedic knowledge in manydifferent ways for the understanding of the common mass of people inthis Age of Kali. And Vyasa is also known as an incarnation of Krsna;therefore Vyasa also represents Krsna. Kavis are those who are capableof thinking thoroughly on any subject matter. Among the kavis, Usanawas the spiritual master of the demons; he was an extremelyintelligent, far-seeing, political and spiritual in every way. ThusUsana is another representative of the opulence of Krsna.
TEXT 38
dando damayatam asmi
nitir asmi jigisatammaunam caivasmi guhyanamjnanam jnanavatam aham
SYNONYMSdandah--punishment; damayatam--of all separation; asmi--I am; nitih--
morality; asmi--I am; jigisatam--of the victorious; maunam--silence;ca--and; eva--also; asmi--I am; guhyanam--of secrets; jnanam--knowledge; jnana-vatam--of the wise; aham--I am.
TRANSLATIONAmong punishments I am the rod of chastisement, and of those who seek
victory I am morality. Of secret things I am silence, and of the wise Iam wisdom.
PURPORT
There are many suppressing agents, of which the most important are
those that cut down the miscreants. When miscreants are punished, therod of chastisement represents Krsna. Among those who are trying to bevictorious in some field of activity, the most victorious element ismorality. Among the confidential activities of hearing, thinking andmeditating, silence is most important because by silence one can makeprogress very quickly. The wise man is he who can discriminate betweenmatter and spirit, between God's superior and inferior natures. Suchknowledge is Krsna Himself.
TEXT 39
yac capi sarva-bhutanam
bijam tad aham arjunana tad asti vina yat syanmaya bhutam caracaram
SYNONYMSyat--whatever; ca--also; api--may be; sarva-bhutanam--of all creations;
bijam--the seed; tat--that; aham--I am; arjuna--O Arjuna; na--not; tat--that; asti--there is; vina--without; yat--that; syat--exists; maya--byMe; bhutam--created; cara-acaram--moving and unmoving.
TRANSLATIONFurthermore, O Arjuna, I am the generating seed of all existences.
There is no being--moving or unmoving--that can exist without Me.
PURPORTEverything has a cause, and that cause or seed of manifestation is
Krsna. Without Krsna's energy, nothing can exist; therefore He iscalled omnipotent. Without His potency, neither the movable nor theunmovable can exist. Whatever existence is not founded on the energy ofKrsna is called maya, that which is not.
TEXT 40
nanto 'sti mama divyanam
vibhutinam parantapaesa tuddesatah proktovibhuter vistaro maya
SYNONYMSna--nor; antah--a limit; asti--is there; mama--My; divyanam--divine;
vibhutinam--opulences; parantapa--O conqueror of the enemies; esah--allthis; tu--that; uddesatah--examples; proktah--spoken; vibhuteh--opulences; vistarah--expanded; maya--by Me.
TRANSLATIONO mighty conqueror of enemies, there is no end to My divine
manifestations. What I have spoken to you is but a mere indication ofMy infinite opulences.
PURPORT
As stated in the Vedic literature, although the opulences and energies
of the Supreme are understood in various ways, there is no limit tosuch opulences; therefore not all the opulences and energies can beexplained. Simply a few examples are being described to Arjuna topacify his inquisitiveness.
TEXT 41
yad yad vibhutimat sattvam
srimad urjitam eva vatat tad evavagaccha tvammama tejo-'msa-sambhavam
SYNONYMSyat yat--whatever; vibhuti--opulences; mat--having; sattvam--existence;
sri-mat--beautiful; urjitam--glorious; eva--certainly; va--or; tat tat--all those; eva--certainly; avagaccha--you must know; tvam--you; mama--My; tejah--splendor; amsa--partly; sambhavam--born of.
TRANSLATIONKnow that all beautiful, glorious, and mighty creations spring from but
a spark of My splendor.
PURPORTAny glorious or beautiful existence should be understood to be but a
fragmental manifestation of Krsna's opulence, whether it be in thespiritual or material world. Anything extraordinarily opulent should beconsidered to represent Krsna's opulence.
TEXT 42
atha va bahunaitena
kim jnatena tavarjunavistabhyaham idam krtsnamekamsena sthito jagat
SYNONYMSatha va--or; bahuna--many; etena--by this kind; kim--what; jnatena--
knowing; tava--you; arjuna--O Arjuna; vistabhya--entire; aham--I; idam--this; krtsnam--of all manifestations; eka--one; amsena--part; sthitah--situated; jagat--in the universe.
TRANSLATIONBut what need is there, Arjuna, for all this detailed knowledge? With a
single fragment of Myself I pervade and support this entire universe.
PURPORTThe Supreme Lord is represented throughout the entire material
universes by His entering into all things as the Supersoul. The Lordhere tells Arjuna that there is no point in understanding how thingsexist in their separate opulence and grandeur. He should know that all
