“Bhagavad-gita As It Is ” by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of
this book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended forpersonal non-commercial use only, under the “fair use” guidelinesestablished by international copyright laws. You may use thiselectronic file to evaluate the printed version of this book, for yourown private use, or for short excerpts used in academic works,research, student papers, presentations, and the like. You candistribute this evaluation copy to others over the Internet, so long asyou keep this copyright information intact. You may not reproduce morethan ten percent (10%) of this book in any media without the expresswritten permission from the copyright holders. Reference any excerptsin the following way: “Excerpted from “Bhagavad-gita As It Is” by A.C.Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta BookTrust International, www.Krishna.com .”
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1972-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or toevaluate dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website ofthe publishers, www.Krishna.com .
Bhagavad-gita
As It Is
COMPLETE EDITION
with original Sanskrit text (in the printed version)
Roman transliteration, English equivalents,
translation and elaborate purports
by
His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada
Founder-Acarya of the Hare Krishna Movement
Original 1972 edition with some corrections to obvious
typographical errors and missing references added
Foreword
by Professor Edward C. Dimock Jr.The Bhagavad-gita is the best known and the most frequently translated
of Vedic religious texts. Why it should be so appealing to the Westernmind is an interesting question. It has drama, for its setting is ascene of two great armies, banners flying, drawn up opposite oneanother on the field, poised for battle. It has ambiguity, and the factthat Arjuna and his charioteer Krsna are carrying on their dialougebetween the two armies suggests the indecision of Arjuna about thebasic question; should he enter battle against and kill those who arefriends and kinsmen? It has mystery, as Krsna demonstrates to Arjuna
His cosmic form, It has a properly complicated view of the ways of the
religious life and treats of the paths of knowledge, works, disciplineand faith and their inter-relationships, problems that have botheredadherents of other religions in other times and places. The devotionspoken of is a deliberate means of religious satisfaction, not a mereoutpouring of poetic emotion. Next to the Bhagavata-purana, a long workfrom South India, the Gita is the text most frequently quoted in thephilosophical writings of the Gaudiya Vaisnava school, the schoolrepresented by Swami Bhaktivedanta as the latest in a long successionof teachers. It can be said that this school of Vaisnavism was founded,or revived, by Sri Krsna-Caitanya Mahaprabhu (1486-1533) in Bengal, andthat it is currently the strongest single religious force in theeastern part of the Indian subcontinent. The Gaudiya Vaisnava school,for whom Krsna is Himself the Supreme God, and not merely anincarnation of another deity, sees bhakti as an immediate and powerfulreligious force, consisting of love between man and God. Its disciplineconsists of devoting all one's actions to the Deity, and one listens tothe stories of Krsna from the sacred texts, one chants Krsna's name,washes, bathes and dresses the murti of Krsna, feeds Him and takes theremains of food offered to Him, thus absorbing His grace; one doesthese things and many more, until one has been changed: the devotee hasbecome transformed into one close to Krsna, and sees the Lord face toface.
Swami Bhaktivedanta comments upon the Gita from this point of view, and
that is legitimate. More than that, in this translation the Westernreader has the unique opportunity of seeing how a Krsna devoteeinterprets his own texts. It is the Vedic exegetical tradition, justlyfamous, in action. This book is then a welcome addition from manypoints of view. It can serve as a valuable textbook for the collegestudent. It allows us to listen to a skilled interpreter explicating atext which has profound religious meaning. It gives us insights intothe original and highly convincing ideas of the Gaudiya Vaisnavaschool. In providing the Sanskrit in both Devanagari andtransliteration, it offers the Sanskrit specialist the opportunity tore-interpret, or debate particular Sanskrit meanings--although I thinkthere will be little disagreement about the quality of the Swami'sSanskrit scholarship. And finally, for the nonspecialist, there isreadable English and a devotional attitude which cannot help but movethe sensitive reader. And there are the paintings, which, incredibly asit may seem to those familiar with contemporary Indian religious art,were done by American devotees.
The scholar, the student of Gayudiya Vaisnavism, and the increasing
number of Western readers interested in classical Vedic thought havebeen done a service by Swami Bhaktivedanta. By bringing us a new andliving interpretation of a text already known to many, he has increasedour understanding manyfold; and arguments for understanding, in thesedays of estrangement, need not be made.
Professor Edward C. Dimock, Jr.
Department of South Asian Languages and Civilization
University of Chicago
To
SRILA BALADEVA VIDYABHUSANA
who presented so nicely
the "Govinda-bhasya" commentary
on
Vedanta philosophy
Preface
Originally I wrote Bhagavad-gita As It Is in the form in which it is
presented now. When this book was first published, the originalmanuscript was, unfortunately, cut short to less than 400 pages,without illustrations and without explanations for most of the originalverses of the Srimad Bhagavad-gita. In all of my other books--Srimad-Bhagavatam, Sri Isopanisad, etc.--the system is that I give theoriginal verse, its English transliteration, word-for-word Sanskrit-English equivalents, translations and purports. This makes the bookvery authentic and scholarly and makes the meaning self-evident. I wasnot very happy, therefore, when I had to minimize my originalmanuscript. But later on, when the demand for Bhagavad-gita As It Isconsiderably increased, I was requested by many scholars and devoteesto present the book in its original form, and Messrs. Macmillan and Co.agreed to publish the complete edition. Thus the present attempt is tooffer the original manuscript of this great book of knowledge with fullparampara explanation in order to establish the Krsna consciousnessmovement more soundly and progressively.
Our Krsna consciousness movement is genuine, historically authorized,
natural and transcendental due to its being based on Bhagavad-gita AsIt Is. It is gradually becoming the most popular movement in the entireworld, especially amongst the younger generation. It is becoming moreand more interesting to the older generation also. Older gentlemen arebecoming interested, so much so that the fathers and grandfathers of mydisciples are encouraging us by becoming life members of our greatsociety, the International Society for Krishna Consciousness. In LosAngeles many fathers and mothers used to come to see me to expresstheir feelings of gratitude for my leading the Krsna consciousnessmovement throughout the entire world. Some of them said that it isgreatly fortunate for the Americans that I have started the Krsnaconsciousness movement in America. But actually the original father ofthis movement is Lord Krsna Himself, since it was started a very longtime ago but is coming down to human society by disciplic succession.If I have any credit in this connection, it does not belong to mepersonally, but it is due to my eternal spiritual master, His DivineGrace Om Visnupada Paramahamsa Parivrajakacarya 108 Sri SrimadBhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami Maharaja Prabhupada.
If personally I have any credit in this matter, it is only that I have
tried to present Bhagavad-gita as it is, without adulteration. Beforemy presentation of Bhagavad-gita As It Is, almost all the Englisheditions of Bhagavad-gita were introduced to fulfill someone's personalambition. But our attempt, in presenting Bhagavad-gita As It Is, is topresent the mission of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. Ourbusiness is to present the will of Krsna, not that of any mundanespeculator like the politician, philosopher or scientist, for they havevery little knowledge of Krsna, despite all their other knowledge. WhenKrsna says, man-mana bhava mad-bhakto mad-yaji mam namaskuru, etc., we,unlike the so-called scholars, do not say that Krsna and His innerspirit are different. Krsna is absolute, and there is no differencebetween Krsna's name, Krsna's form, Krsna's qualities, Krsna'spastimes, etc. This absolute position of Krsna is difficult tounderstand for any person who is not a devotee of Krsna in theparampara (disciplic succession). Generally the so-called scholars,politicians, philosophers, and svamis, without perfect knowledge ofKrsna, try to banish or kill Krsna when writing commentary on Bhagavad-
gita. Such unauthorized commentary upon Bhagavad-gita is known as
Mayavada-bhasya, and Lord Caitanya has warned us about theseunauthorized men. Lord Caitanya clearly says that anyone who tries tounderstand Bhagavad-gita from the Mayavadi point of view will commit agreat blunder. The result of such a blunder will be that the misguidedstudent of Bhagavad-gita will certainly be bewildered on the path ofspiritual guidance and will not be able to go back to home, back toGodhead.
Our only purpose is to present this Bhagavad-gita As It Is in order to
guide the conditioned student to the same purpose for which Krsnadescends to this planet once in a day of Brahma, or every 8,600,000,000years. This purpose is stated in Bhagavad-gita, and we have to acceptit as it is; otherwise there is no point in trying to understand theBhagavad-gita and its speaker, Lord Krsna. Lord Krsna first spokeBhagavad-gita to the sun-god some hundreds of millions of years ago. Wehave to accept this fact and thus understand the historicalsignificance of Bhagavad-gita, without misinterpretation, on theauthority of Krsna. To interpret Bhagavad-gita without any reference tothe will of Krsna is the greatest offense. In order to save oneselffrom this offense, one has to understand the Lord as the SupremePersonality of Godhead, as He was directly understood by Arjuna, LordKrsna's first disciple. Such understanding of Bhagavad-gita is reallyprofitable and authorized for the welfare of human society infulfilling the mission of life.
The Krsna consciousness movement is essential in human society, for it
offers the highest perfection of life. How this is so is explainedfully in the Bhagavad-gita. Unfortunately, mundane wranglers have takenadvantage of Bhagavad-gita to push forward their demonic propensitiesand mislead people regarding right understanding of the simpleprinciples of life. Everyone should know how God, or Krsna, is great,and everyone should know the factual position of the living entities.Everyone should know that a living entity is eternally a servant andthat unless one serves Krsna one has to serve illusion in differentvarieties of the three modes of material nature, and thus perpetuallyone has to wander within the cycle of birth and death; even the so-called liberated Mayavadi speculator has to undergo this process. Thisknowledge constitutes a great science, and each and every living beinghas to hear it for his own interest.
People in general, especially in this Age of Kali, are enamored by the
external energy of Krsna, and they wrongly think that by advancement ofmaterial comforts every man will be happy. They have no knowledge thatthe material or external nature is very strong, for everyone isstrongly bound by the stringent laws of material nature. A livingentity is happily the part and parcel of the Lord, and thus his naturalfunction is to render immediate service to the Lord. By the spell ofillusion one tries to be happy by serving his personal sensegratification in different forms which will never make him happy.Instead of satisfying his own personal material senses, he has tosatisfy the senses of the Lord. That is the highest perfection of life.The Lord wants this, and He demands it. One has to understand thiscentral point of Bhagavad-gita. Our Krsna consciousness movement isteaching the whole world this central point, and because we are notpolluting the theme of Bhagavad-gita As It Is, anyone seriouslyinterested in deriving benefit by studying the Bhagavad-gita must takehelp from the Krsna consciousness movement for practical understanding
of Bhagavad-gita under the direct guidance of the Lord. We hope,
therefore, that people will derive the greatest benefit by studyingBhagavad-gita As It Is as we have presented it here, and if even oneman becomes a pure devotee of the Lord, we shall consider our attempt asuccess.
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
12 May, 1971
Sydney, Australia
Introduction
om ajnana-timirandhasya
jnananjana-salakaya
caksur unmilitam yena
tasmai sri-gurave namah
sri-caitanya-mano-'bhistam
sthapitam yena bhu-tale
svayam rupah kada mahyam
dadati sva-padantikam
I was born in the darkest ignorance, and my spiritual master opened myeyes with the torch of knowledge. I offer my respectful obeisances untohim.
When will Srila Rupa Gosvami Prabhupada, who has established within
this material world the mission to fulfill the desire of Lord Caitanya,give me shelter under his lotus feet?
vande 'ham sri-guroh sri-yuta-pada-kamalam sri-gurun vaisnavams ca
sri-rupam sagrajatam saha-gana-raghunathanvitam tam sa-jivam
sadvaitam savadhutam parijana-sahitam krsna-caitanya-devam
sri-radha-krsna-padan saha-gana-lalita-sri-visakhanvitams ca
I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of my spiritualmaster and unto the feet of all Vaisnavas. I offer my respectfulobeisances unto the lotus feet of Srila Rupa Gosvami along with hiselder brother Sanatana Gosvami, as well as Raghunatha Dasa andRaghunatha Bhatta, Gopala Bhatta, and Srila Jiva Gosvami. I offer myrespectful obeisances to Lord Krsna Caitanya and Lord Nityananda alongwith Advaita Acarya, Gadadhara, Srivasa, and other associates. I offermy respectful obeisances to Srimati Radharani and Sri Krsna along withTheir associates, Sri Lalita and Visakha.
he krsna karuna-sindho
dina-bandho jagat-pate
gopesa gopika-kanta
radha-kanta namo 'stu te
O my dear Krsna, You are the friend of the distressed and the source ofcreation. You are the master of the gopis and the lover of Radharani. Ioffer my respectful obeisances unto You.
tapta-kancana-gaurangi
radhe vrndavanesvari
vrsabhanu-sute devi
pranamami hari-priye
I offer my respects to Radharani whose bodily complexion is like molten
gold and who is the Queen of Vrndavana. You are the daughter of KingVrsabhanu, and You are very dear to Lord Krsna.
vancha-kalpatarubhyas ca
krpa-sindhubhya eva ca
patitanam pavanebhyo
vaisnavebhyo namo namah
I offer my respectful obeisances unto all the Vaisnava devotees of the
Lord who can fulfill the desires of everyone, just like desire trees,and who are full of compassion for the fallen souls.
sri-krsna-caitanya
prabhu-nityananda
sri-advaita gadadhara
srivasadi-gaura-bhakta-vrnda
I offer my obeisances to Sri Krsna Caitanya, Prabhu Nityananda, SriAdvaita, Gadadhara, Srivasa and all others in the line of devotion.
hare krsna hare krsna
krsna krsna hare hare
hare rama hare rama
rama rama hare hare
Bhagavad-gita is also known as Gitopanisad. It is the essence of Vedicknowledge and one of the most important Upanisads in Vedic literature.Of course there are many commentaries in English on the Bhagavad-gita,and one may question the necessity for another one. This presentedition can be explained in the following way. Recently an Americanlady asked me to recommend an English translation of Bhagavad-gita. Ofcourse in America there are so many editions of Bhagavad-gita availablein English, but as far as I have seen, not only in America but also inIndia, none of them can be strictly said to be authoritative because inalmost every one of them the commentator has expressed his own opinionswithout touching the spirit of Bhagavad-gita as it is.
The spirit of Bhagavad-gita is mentioned in Bhagavad-gita itself. It is
just like this: If we want to take a particular medicine, then we haveto follow the directions written on the label. We cannot take themedicine according to our own whim or the direction of a friend. Itmust be taken according to the directions on the label or thedirections given by a physician. Similarly, Bhagavad-gita should betaken or accepted as it is directed by the speaker Himself. The speakerof Bhagavad-gita is Lord Sri Krsna. He is mentioned on every page ofBhagavad-gita as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Bhagavan. Ofcourse the word bhagavan sometimes refers to any powerful person or anypowerful demigod, and certainly here bhagavan designates Lord Sri Krsnaas a great personality, but at the same time we should know that LordSri Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as is confirmed by allgreat acaryas (spiritual masters) like Sankaracarya, Ramanujacarya,Madhvacarya, Nimbarka Svami, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and many otherauthorities of Vedic knowledge in India. The Lord Himself alsoestablishes Himself as the Supreme Personality of Godhead in theBhagavad-gita, and He is accepted as such in the Brahma-samhita and allthe Puranas, especially the Srimad-Bhagavatam, known as the BhagavataPurana (krsnas tu bhagavan svayam). Therefore we should take Bhagavad-gita as it is directed by the Personality of Godhead Himself. In theFourth Chapter of the Gita (4.1-3) the Lord says:
imam vivasvate yogam
proktavan aham avyayam
vivasvan manave praha
manur iksvakave 'bravit
evam parampara-praptam
imam rajarsayo viduh
sa kaleneha mahata
yogo nastah parantapa
sa evayam maya te 'dya
yogah proktah puratanah
bhakto 'si me sakha ceti
rahasyam hy etad uttamam
Here the Lord informs Arjuna that this system of yoga, the Bhagavad-gita, was first spoken to the sun-god, and the sun-god explained it toManu, and Manu explained it to Iksvaku, and in that way, by disciplicsuccession, one speaker after another, this yoga system has been comingdown. But in the course of time it has become lost. Consequently theLord has to speak it again, this time to Arjuna on the Battlefield ofKuruksetra.
He tells Arjuna that He is relating this supreme secret to him because
he is His devotee and His friend. The purport of this is that Bhagavad-gita is a treatise which is especially meant for the devotee of theLord. There are three classes of transcendentalists, namely the jnani,the yogi and the bhakta, or the impersonalist, the meditator and thedevotee. Here the Lord clearly tells Arjuna that He is making him thefirst receiver of a new parampara (disciplic succession) because theold succession was broken. It was the Lord's wish, therefore, toestablish another parampara in the same line of thought that was comingdown from the sun-god to others, and it was His wish that His teachingbe distributed anew by Arjuna. He wanted Arjuna to become the authorityin understanding the Bhagavad-gita. So we see that Bhagavad-gita isinstructed to Arjuna especially because Arjuna was a devotee of theLord, a direct student of Krsna, and His intimate friend. ThereforeBhagavad-gita is best understood by a person who has qualities similarto Arjuna's. That is to say he must be a devotee in a directrelationship with the Lord. That is a very elaborate subject matter,but briefly it can be stated that a devotee is in a relationship withthe Supreme Personality of Godhead in one of five different ways:
1. One may be a devotee in a passive state;
2. One may be a devotee in an active state;3. One may be a devotee as a friend;4. One may be a devotee as a parent;5. One may be a devotee as a conjugal lover.
Arjuna was in a relationship with the Lord as friend. Of course there
is a gulf of difference between this friendship and the friendshipfound in the material world. This is transcendental friendship whichcannot be had by everyone. Of course everyone has a particularrelationship with the Lord, and that relationship is evoked by theperfection of devotional service. But in the present status of ourlife, we have not only forgotten the Supreme Lord, but we haveforgotten our eternal relationship with the Lord. Every living being,out of the many, many billions and trillions of living beings, has aparticular relationship with the Lord eternally. That is calledsvarupa. By the process of devotional service, one can revive thatsvarupa, and that stage is called svarupa-siddhi--perfection of one'sconstitutional position. So Arjuna was a devotee, and he was in touchwith the Supreme Lord in friendship.
How Arjuna accepted this Bhagavad-gita should be noted. His manner of
acceptance is given in the Tenth Chapter (10.12-14):
arjuna uvaca
param brahma param dhama
pavitram paramam bhavan
purusam sasvatam divyam
adi-devam ajam vibhum
ahus tvam rsayah sarve
devarsir naradas tatha
asito devalo vyasah
svayam caiva bravisi me
sarvam etad rtam manye
yan mam vadasi kesava
na hi te bhagavan vyaktim
vidur deva na danavah
"Arjuna said: You are the Supreme Brahman, the ultimate, the supremeabode and purifier, the Absolute Truth and the eternal Divine Person.You are the primal God, transcendental and original, and you are theunborn and all-pervading beauty. All the great sages like Narada,Asita, Devala, and Vyasa proclaim this of You, and now You Yourself aredeclaring it to me. O Krsna, I totally accept as truth all that Youhave told me. Neither the gods nor the demons, O Lord, know Thypersonality."
After hearing Bhagavad-gita from the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Arjuna accepted Krsna as param brahma, the Supreme Brahman. Everyliving being is Brahman, but the supreme living being, or the SupremePersonality of Godhead, is the Supreme Brahman. Param dhama means thatHe is the supreme rest or abode of everything; pavitram means that Heis pure, untainted by material contamination; purusam means that He isthe supreme enjoyer; sasvatam, original; divyam, transcendental; adi-devam, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ajam, the unborn; andvibhum, the greatest, the all-pervading.
Now one may think that because Krsna was the friend of Arjuna, Arjuna
was telling Him all this by way of flattery, but Arjuna, just to driveout this kind of doubt from the minds of the readers of Bhagavad-gita,substantiates these praises in the next verse when he says that Krsnais accepted as the Supreme Personality of Godhead not only by himselfbut by authorities like the sage Narada, Asita, Devala, Vyasadeva andso on. These are great personalities who distribute the Vedic knowledgeas it is accepted by all acaryas. Therefore Arjuna tells Krsna that heaccepts whatever He says to be completely perfect. Sarvam etad rtammanye: "I accept everything You say to be true." Arjuna also says thatthe personality of the Lord is very difficult to understand and that Hecannot be known even by the great demigods. This means that the Lordcannot even be known by personalities greater than human beings. So howcan a human being understand Sri Krsna without becoming His devotee?
Therefore Bhagavad-gita should be taken up in a spirit of devotion. One
should not think that he is equal to Krsna, nor should he think thatKrsna is an ordinary personality or even a very great personality. LordSri Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, at least
theoretically, according to the statements of Bhagavad-gita or the
statements of Arjuna, the person who is trying to understand theBhagavad-gita. We should therefore at least theoretically accept SriKrsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and with that submissivespirit we can understand the Bhagavad-gita. Unless one reads theBhagavad-gita in a submissive spirit, it is very difficult tounderstand Bhagavad-gita because it is a great mystery.
Just what is the Bhagavad-gita? The purpose of Bhagavad-gita is to
deliver mankind from the nescience of material existence. Every man isin difficulty in so many ways, as Arjuna also was in difficulty inhaving to fight the Battle of Kuruksetra. Arjuna surrendered unto SriKrsna, and consequently this Bhagavad-gita was spoken. Not only Arjuna,but every one of us is full of anxieties because of this materialexistence. Our very existence is in the atmosphere of nonexistence.Actually we are not meant to be threatened by nonexistence. Ourexistence is eternal. But somehow or other we are put into asat. Asatrefers to that which does not exist.
Out of so many human beings who are suffering, there are a few who are
actually inquiring about their position, as to what they are, why theyare put into this awkward position and so on. Unless one is awakened tothis position of questioning his suffering, unless he realizes that hedoesn't want suffering but rather wants to make a solution to allsuffering, then one is not to be considered a perfect human being.Humanity begins when this sort of inquiry is awakened in one's mind. Inthe Brahma-sutra this inquiry is called brahma jijnasa. Every activityof the human being is to be considered a failure unless he inquiresabout the nature of the Absolute. Therefore those who begin to questionwhy they are suffering or where they came from and where they shall goafter death are proper students for understanding Bhagavad-gita. Thesincere student should also have a firm respect for the SupremePersonality of Godhead. Such a student was Arjuna.
Lord Krsna descends specifically to reestablish the real purpose of
life when man forgets that purpose. Even then, out of many, many humanbeings who awaken, there may be one who actually enters the spirit ofunderstanding his position, and for him this Bhagavad-gita is spoken.Actually we are all followed by the tigress of nescience, but the Lordis very merciful upon living entities, especially human beings. To thisend He spoke the Bhagavad-gita, making His friend Arjuna His student.
Being an associate of Lord Krsna, Arjuna was above all ignorance, but
Arjuna was put into ignorance on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra just toquestion Lord Krsna about the problems of life so that the Lord couldexplain them for the benefit of future generations of human beings andchalk out the plan of life. Then man could act accordingly and perfectthe mission of human life.
The subject of the Bhagavad-gita entails the comprehension of five
basic truths. First of all, the science of God is explained and thenthe constitutional position of the living entities, jivas. There isisvara, which means controller, and there are jivas, the livingentities which are controlled. If a living entity says that he is notcontrolled but that he is free, then he is insane. The living being iscontrolled in every respect, at least in his conditioned life. So inthe Bhagavad-gita the subject matter deals with the isvara, the supremecontroller, and the jivas, the controlled living entities. Prakrti
(material nature) and time (the duration of existence of the whole
universe or the manifestation of material nature) and karma (activity)are also discussed. The cosmic manifestation is full of differentactivities. All living entities are engaged in different activities.From Bhagavad-gita we must learn what God is, what the living entitiesare, what prakrti is, what the cosmic manifestation is, how it iscontrolled by time, and what the activities of the living entities are.
Out of these five basic subject matters in Bhagavad-gita it is
established that the Supreme Godhead, or Krsna, or Brahman, or thesupreme controller, or Paramatma--you may use whatever name you like--is the greatest of all. The living beings are in quality like thesupreme controller. For instance, the Lord has control over theuniversal affairs, over material nature, as will be explained in thelater chapters of Bhagavad-gita. Material nature is not independent.She is acting under the directions of the Supreme Lord. As Lord Krsnasays, mayadhyaksena prakrtih suyate sa-caracaram: "This material natureis working under My direction." When we see wonderful things happeningin the cosmic nature, we should know that behind this cosmicmanifestation there is a controller. Nothing could be manifestedwithout being controlled. It is childish not to consider thecontroller. For instance, a child may think that an automobile is quitewonderful to be able to run without a horse or other animal pulling it,but a sane man knows the nature of the automobile's engineeringarrangement. He always knows that behind the machinery there is a man,a driver. Similarly, the Supreme Lord is a driver under whose directioneverything is working. Now the jivas, or the living entities, have beenaccepted by the Lord, as we will note in the later chapters, as Hisparts and parcels. A particle of gold is also gold, a drop of waterfrom the ocean is also salty, and similarly, we the living entities,being part and parcel of the supreme controller, isvara, or Bhagavan,Lord Sri Krsna, have all the qualities of the Supreme Lord in minutequantity because we are minute isvaras, subordinate isvaras. We aretrying to control nature, as presently we are trying to control spaceor planets, and this tendency to control is there because it is inKrsna. But although we have a tendency to lord it over material nature,we should know that we are not the supreme controller. This isexplained in Bhagavad-gita.
What is material nature? This is also explained in Gita as inferior
prakrti, inferior nature. The living entity is explained as thesuperior prakrti. Prakrti is always under control, whether inferior orsuperior. Prakrti is female, and she is controlled by the Lord just asthe activities of a wife are controlled by the husband. Prakrti isalways subordinate, predominated by the Lord, who is the predominator.The living entities and material nature are both predominated,controlled by the Supreme Lord. According to the Gita, the livingentities, although parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord, are to beconsidered prakrti. This is clearly mentioned in the Seventh Chapter,Fifth Verse of Bhagavad-gita: Apareyam itas tv anyam, "This prakrti isMy lower nature," prakrtim viddhi me param jiva-bhutam maha-bahoyayedam dharyate jagat. And beyond this there is another prakrti: jiva-bhutam, the living entity.
Prakrti itself is constituted by three qualities: the mode of goodness,
the mode of passion and the mode of ignorance. Above these modes thereis eternal time, and by a combination of these modes of nature andunder the control and purview of eternal time there are activities
which are called karma. These activities are being carried out from
time immemorial, and we are suffering or enjoying the fruits of ouractivities. For instance, suppose I am a businessman and have workedvery hard with intelligence and have amassed a great bank balance. ThenI am an enjoyer. But then say I have lost all my money in business;then I am a sufferer. Similarly, in every field of life we enjoy theresults of our work, or we suffer the results. This is called karma.
Isvara (the Supreme Lord), jiva (the living entity), prakrti (nature),
eternal time and karma (activity) are all explained in the Bhagavad-gita. Out of these five, the Lord, the living entities, material natureand time are eternal. The manifestation of prakrti may be temporary,but it is not false. Some philosophers say that the manifestation ofmaterial nature is false, but according to the philosophy of Bhagavad-gita or according to the philosophy of the Vaisnavas, this is not so.The manifestation of the world is not accepted as false; it is acceptedas real, but temporary. It is likened unto a cloud which moves acrossthe sky, or the coming of the rainy season which nourishes grains. Assoon as the rainy season is over and as soon as the cloud goes away,all the crops which were nourished by the rain dry up. Similarly, thismaterial manifestation takes place at a certain interval, stays for awhile and then disappears. Such are the workings of prakrti. But thiscycle is working eternally. Therefore prakrti is eternal; it is notfalse. The Lord refers to this as "My prakrti." This material nature isthe separated energy of the Supreme Lord, and similarly the livingentities are also the energy of the Supreme Lord, but they are notseparated. They are eternally related. So the Lord, the living entity,material nature and time are all interrelated and are all eternal.However, the other item, karma, is not eternal. The effects of karmamay be very old indeed. We are suffering or enjoying the results of ouractivities from time immemorial, but we can change the results of ourkarma, or our activity, and this change depends on the perfection ofour knowledge. We are engaged in various activities. Undoubtedly we donot know what sort of activities we should adopt to gain relief fromthe actions and reactions of all these activities, but this is alsoexplained in the Bhagavad-gita.
The position of isvara is that of supreme consciousness. The jivas, or
the living entities, being parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord, arealso conscious. Both the living entity and material nature areexplained as prakrti, the energy of the Supreme Lord, but one of thetwo, the jiva, is conscious. The other prakrti is not conscious. Thatis the difference. Therefore the jiva-prakrti is called superiorbecause the jiva has consciousness which is similar to the Lord's. TheLord's is supreme consciousness, however, and one should not claim thatthe jiva, the living entity, is also supremely conscious. The livingbeing cannot be supremely conscious at any stage of his perfection, andthe theory that he can be so is a misleading theory. Conscious he maybe, but he is not perfectly or supremely conscious.
The distinction between the jiva and the isvara will be explained in
the Thirteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gita. The Lord is ksetra-jna,conscious, as is the living being, but the living being is conscious ofhis particular body, whereas the Lord is conscious of all bodies.Because He lives in the heart of every living being, He is conscious ofthe psychic movements of the particular jivas. We should not forgetthis. It is also explained that the Paramatma, the Supreme Personalityof Godhead, is living in everyone's heart as isvara, as the controller,
and that He is giving directions for the living entity to act as he
desires. The living entity forgets what to do. First of all he makes adetermination to act in a certain way, and then he is entangled in theactions and reactions of his own karma. After giving up one type ofbody, he enters another type of body, as we put on and take off oldclothes. As the soul thus migrates, he suffers the actions andreactions of his past activities. These activities can be changed whenthe living being is in the mode of goodness, in sanity, and understandswhat sort of activities he should adopt. If he does so, then all theactions and reactions of his past activities can be changed.Consequently, karma is not eternal. Therefore we stated that of thefive items (isvara, jiva, prakrti, time and karma) four are eternal,whereas karma is not eternal.
The supreme conscious isvara is similar to the living entity in this
way: both the consciousness of the Lord and that of the living entityare transcendental. It is not that consciousness is generated by theassociation of matter. That is a mistaken idea. The theory thatconsciousness develops under certain circumstances of materialcombination is not accepted in the Bhagavad-gita. Consciousness may bepervertedly reflected by the covering of material circumstances, justas light reflected through colored glass may appear to be a certaincolor, but the consciousness of the Lord is not materially affected.Lord Krsna says, mayadhyaksena prakrtih. When He descends into thematerial universe, His consciousness is not materially affected. If Hewere so affected, He would be unfit to speak on transcendental mattersas He does in the Bhagavad-gita. One cannot say anything about thetranscendental world without being free from materially contaminatedconsciousness. So the Lord is not materially contaminated. Ourconsciousness, at the present moment, however, is materiallycontaminated. The Bhagavad-gita teaches that we have to purify thismaterially contaminated consciousness. In pure consciousness, ouractions will be dovetailed to the will of isvara, and that will make ushappy. It is not that we have to cease all activities. Rather, ouractivities are to be purified, and purified activities are calledbhakti. Activities in bhakti appear to be like ordinary activities, butthey are not contaminated. An ignorant person may see that a devotee isacting or working like an ordinary man, but such a person with a poorfund of knowledge does not know that the activities of the devotee orof the Lord are not contaminated by impure consciousness or matter.They are transcendental to the three modes of nature. We should know,however, that at this point our consciousness is contaminated.
When we are materially contaminated, we are called conditioned. False
consciousness is exhibited under the impression that I am a product ofmaterial nature. This is called false ego. One who is absorbed in thethought of bodily conceptions cannot understand his situation.Bhagavad-gita was spoken to liberate one from the bodily conception oflife, and Arjuna put himself in this position in order to receive thisinformation from the Lord. One must become free from the bodilyconception of life; that is the preliminary activity for thetranscendentalist. One who wants to become free, who wants to becomeliberated, must first of all learn that he is not this material body.Mukti or liberation means freedom from material consciousness. In theSrimad-Bhagavatam also the definition of liberation is given. Muktirhitvanyatha-rupam svarupena vyavasthitih: mukti means liberation fromthe contaminated consciousness of this material world and situation inpure consciousness. All the instructions of Bhagavad-gita are intended
to awaken this pure consciousness, and therefore we find at the last
stage of the Gita's instructions that Krsna is asking Arjuna whether heis now in purified consciousness. Purified consciousness means actingin accordance with the instructions of the Lord. This is the whole sumand substance of purified consciousness. Consciousness is already therebecause we are part and parcel of the Lord, but for us there is theaffinity of being affected by the inferior modes. But the Lord, beingthe Supreme, is never affected. That is the difference between theSupreme Lord and the conditioned souls.
What is this consciousness? This consciousness is "I am." Then what am
I? In contaminated consciousness "I am" means "I am the lord of all Isurvey. I am the enjoyer." The world revolves because every livingbeing thinks that he is the lord and creator of the material world.Material consciousness has two psychic divisions. One is that I am thecreator, and the other is that I am the enjoyer. But actually theSupreme Lord is both the creator and the enjoyer, and the livingentity, being part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, is neither thecreator nor the enjoyer, but a cooperator. He is the created and theenjoyed. For instance, a part of a machine cooperates with the wholemachine; a part of the body cooperates with the whole body. The hands,feet, eyes, legs and so on are all parts of the body, but they are notactually the enjoyers. The stomach is the enjoyer. The legs move, thehands supply food, the teeth chew, and all parts of the body areengaged in satisfying the stomach because the stomach is the principalfactor that nourishes the body's organization. Therefore everything isgiven to the stomach. One nourishes the tree by watering its root, andone nourishes the body by feeding the stomach, for if the body is to bekept in a healthy state, then the parts of the body must cooperate tofeed the stomach. Similarly, the Supreme Lord is the enjoyer and thecreator, and we, as subordinate living beings, are meant to cooperateto satisfy Him. This cooperation will actually help us, just as foodtaken by the stomach will help all other parts of the body. If thefingers of the hand think that they should take the food themselvesinstead of giving it to the stomach, then they will be frustrated. Thecentral figure of creation and of enjoyment is the Supreme Lord, andthe living entities are cooperators. By cooperation they enjoy. Therelation is also like that of the master and the servant. If the masteris fully satisfied, then the servant is satisfied. Similarly, theSupreme Lord should be satisfied, although the tendency to become thecreator and the tendency to enjoy the material world are there also inthe living entities because these tendencies are there in the SupremeLord who has created the manifested cosmic world.
We shall find, therefore, in this Bhagavad-gita that the complete whole
is comprised of the supreme controller, the controlled living entities,the cosmic manifestation, eternal time and karma, or activities, andall of these are explained in this text. All of these taken completelyform the complete whole, and the complete whole is called the SupremeAbsolute Truth. The complete whole and the complete Absolute Truth arethe Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna. All manifestations aredue to His different energies. He is the complete whole.
It is also explained in the Gita that impersonal Brahman is also
subordinate to the complete (brahmano hi pratisthaham). Brahman is moreexplicitly explained in the Brahma-sutra to be like the rays of thesunshine. The impersonal Brahman is the shining rays of the SupremePersonality of Godhead. Impersonal Brahman is incomplete realization of
the absolute whole, and so also is the conception of Paramatma in the
Twelfth Chapter. There it shall be seen that the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, Purusottama, is above both impersonal Brahman and the partialrealization of Paramatma. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is calledsac-cid-ananda-vigraha. The Brahma-samhita begins in this way: isvarahparamah krsnah sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah. anadir adir govindah sarva-karana-karanam. "Krsna, is the cause of all causes. He is the primalcause, and He is the very form of eternity, knowledge and bliss."Impersonal Brahman realization is the realization of His sat (being)feature. Paramatma realization is the realization of cit (eternalknowledge). But realization of the Personality of Godhead, Krsna, isrealization of all the transcendental features: sat, cit and ananda(being, knowledge, bliss) in complete vigraha (form).
People with less intelligence consider the Supreme Truth to be
impersonal, but He is a transcendental person, and this is confirmed inall Vedic literatures. Nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam. (KathaUpanisad 2.2.13) As we are all individual living beings and have ourindividuality, the Supreme Absolute Truth is also, in the ultimateissue, a person, and realization of the Personality of Godhead isrealization of all of the transcendental features. The complete wholeis not formless. If He is formless, or if He is less than any otherthing, then He cannot be the complete whole. The complete whole musthave everything within our experience and beyond our experience,otherwise it cannot be complete. The complete whole, Personality ofGodhead, has immense potencies (parasya saktir vividhaiva sruyate).
How Krsna is acting in different potencies is also explained in
Bhagavad-gita. This phenomenal world or material world in which we areplaced is also complete in itself because the twenty-four elements ofwhich this material universe is a temporary manifestation, according toSankhya philosophy, are completely adjusted to produce completeresources which are necessary for the maintenance and subsistence ofthis universe. There is nothing extraneous; nor is there anythingneeded. This manifestation has its own time fixed by the energy of thesupreme whole, and when its time is complete, these temporarymanifestations will be annihilated by the complete arrangement of thecomplete. There is complete facility for the small complete units,namely the living entities, to realize the complete, and all sorts ofincompleteness are experienced due to incomplete knowledge of thecomplete. So Bhagavad-gita contains the complete knowledge of Vedicwisdom.
All Vedic knowledge is infallible, and Hindus accept Vedic knowledge to
be complete and infallible. For example, cow dung is the stool of ananimal, and according to smrti, or Vedic injunction, if one touches thestool of an animal he has to take a bath to purify himself. But in theVedic scriptures cow dung is considered to be a purifying agent. Onemight consider this to be contradictory, but it is accepted because itis Vedic injunction, and indeed by accepting this, one will not commita mistake; subsequently it has been proved by modern science that cowdung contains all antiseptic properties. So Vedic knowledge is completebecause it is above all doubts and mistakes, and Bhagavad-gita is theessence of all Vedic knowledge.
Vedic knowledge is not a question of research. Our research work is
imperfect because we are researching things with imperfect senses. Wehave to accept perfect knowledge which comes down, as is stated in
Bhagavad-gita, by the parampara (disciplic succession). We have to
receive knowledge from the proper source in disciplic successionbeginning with the supreme spiritual master, the Lord Himself, andhanded down to a succession of spiritual masters. Arjuna, the studentwho took lessons from Lord Sri Krsna, accepts everything that He sayswithout contradicting Him. One is not allowed to accept one portion ofBhagavad-gita and not another. No. We must accept Bhagavad-gita withoutinterpretation, without deletion and without our own whimsicalparticipation in the matter. The Gita should be taken as the mostperfect presentation of Vedic knowledge. Vedic knowledge is receivedfrom transcendental sources, and the first words were spoken by theLord Himself. The words spoken by the Lord are called apauruseya,meaning that they are different from words spoken by a person of themundane world who is infected with four defects. A mundaner is 1) issure to commit mistakes, 2) is invariably illusioned, 3) has thetendency to cheat others and 4) is limited by imperfect senses. Withthese four imperfections, one cannot deliver perfect information ofall-pervading knowledge.
Vedic knowledge is not imparted by such defective living entities. It
was imparted unto the heart of Brahma, the first created living being,and Brahma in his turn disseminated this knowledge to his sons anddisciples, as he originally received it from the Lord. The Lord ispurnam, all-perfect, and there is no possibility of His becomingsubjected to the laws of material nature. One should therefore beintelligent enough to know that the Lord is the only proprietor ofeverything in the universe and that He is the original creator, thecreator of Brahma. In the Eleventh Chapter the Lord is addressed asprapitamaha because Brahma is addressed as pitamaha, the grandfather,and He is the creator of the grandfather. So no one should claim to bethe proprietor of anything; one should accept only things which are setaside for him by the Lord as his quota for his maintenance.
There are many examples given of how we are to utilize those things
which are set aside for us by the Lord. This is also explained inBhagavad-gita. In the beginning, Arjuna decided that he should notfight in the Battle of Kuruksetra. This was his own decision. Arjunatold the Lord that it was not possible for him to enjoy the kingdomafter killing his own kinsmen. This decision was based on the bodybecause he was thinking that the body was himself and that his bodilyrelations or expansions were his brothers, nephews, brothers-in-law,grandfathers and so on. He was thinking in this way to satisfy hisbodily demands. Bhagavad-gita was spoken by the Lord just to changethis view, and at the end Arjuna decides to fight under the directionsof the Lord when he says, karisye vacanam tava: "I shall act accordingto Thy word."
In this world man is not meant to toil like hogs. He must be
intelligent to realize the importance of human life and refuse to actlike an ordinary animal. A human being should realize the aim of hislife, and this direction is given in all Vedic literatures, and theessence is given in Bhagavad-gita. Vedic literature is meant for humanbeings, not for animals. Animals can kill other living animals, andthere is no question of sin on their part, but if a man kills an animalfor the satisfaction of his uncontrolled taste, he must be responsiblefor breaking the laws of nature. In the Bhagavad-gita it is clearlyexplained that there are three kinds of activities according to thedifferent modes of nature: the activities of goodness, of passion and
of ignorance. Similarly, there are three kinds of eatables also:
eatables in goodness, passion and ignorance. All of this is clearlydescribed, and if we properly utilize the instructions of Bhagavad-gita, then our whole life will become purified, and ultimately we willbe able to reach the destination which is beyond this material sky.
That destination is called the sanatana sky, the eternal spiritual sky.
In this material world we find that everything is temporary. It comesinto being, stays for some time, produces some by-products, dwindlesand then vanishes. That is the law of the material world, whether weuse as an example this body, or a piece of fruit or anything. Butbeyond this temporary world there is another world of which we haveinformation. This world consists of another nature, which is sanatana,eternal. Jiva is also described as sanatana, eternal, and the Lord isalso described as sanatana in the Eleventh Chapter. We have an intimaterelationship with the Lord, and because we are all qualitatively one--the sanatana-dhama, or sky, the sanatana Supreme Personality and thesanatana living entities--the whole purpose of Bhagavad-gita is torevive our sanatana occupation, or sanatana-dharma, which is theeternal occupation of the living entity. We are temporarily engaged indifferent activities, but all of these activities can be purified whenwe give up all these temporary activities and take up the activitieswhich are prescribed by the Supreme Lord. That is called our pure life.
The Supreme Lord and His transcendental abode are both sanatana, as are
the living entities, and the combined association of the Supreme Lordand the living entities in the sanatana abode is the perfection ofhuman life. The Lord is very kind to the living entities because theyare His sons. Lord Krsna declares in Bhagavad-gita, sarva-yonisu...aham bija-pradah pita: "I am the father of all." Of course there areall types of living entities according to their various karmas, buthere the Lord claims that He is the father of all of them. Thereforethe Lord descends to reclaim all of these fallen, conditioned souls tocall them back to the sanatana eternal sky so that the sanatana livingentities may regain their eternal sanatana positions in eternalassociation with the Lord. The Lord comes Himself in differentincarnations, or He sends His confidential servants as sons or Hisassociates or acaryas to reclaim the conditioned souls.
Therefore, sanatana-dharma does not refer to any sectarian process of
religion. It is the eternal function of the eternal living entities inrelationship with the eternal Supreme Lord. Sanatana-dharma refers, asstated previously, to the eternal occupation of the living entity.Ramanujacarya has explained the word sanatana as "that which hasneither beginning nor end," so when we speak of sanatana-dharma, wemust take it for granted on the authority of Sri Ramanujacarya that ithas neither beginning nor end.
The English world religion is a little different from sanatana-dharma.
Religion conveys the idea of faith, and faith may change. One may havefaith in a particular process, and he may change this faith and adoptanother, but sanatana-dharma refers to that activity which cannot bechanged. For instance, liquidity cannot be taken from water, nor canheat be taken from fire. Similarly, the eternal function of the eternalliving entity cannot be taken from the living entity. Sanatana-dharmais eternally integral with the living entity. When we speak ofsanatana-dharma, therefore, we must take it for granted on theauthority of Sri Ramanujacarya that it has neither beginning nor end.
That which has neither end nor beginning must not be sectarian, for it
cannot be limited by any boundaries. Those belonging to some sectarianfaith will wrongly consider that sanatana-dharma is also sectarian, butif we go deeply into the matter and consider it in the light of modernscience, it is possible for us to see that sanatana-dharma is thebusiness of all the people of the world--nay, of all the livingentities of the universe.
Non-sanatana religious faith may have some beginning in the annals of
human history, but there is no beginning to the history of sanatana-dharma because it remains eternally with the living entities. Insofaras the living entities are concerned, the authoritative sastras statethat the living entity has neither birth nor death. In the Gita it isstated that the living entity is never born, and he never dies. He iseternal and indestructible, and he continues to live after thedestruction of his temporary material body. In reference to the conceptof sanatana-dharma, we must try to understand the concept of religionfrom the Sanskrit root meaning of the word. Dharma refers to that whichis constantly existing with a particular object. We conclude that thereis heat and light along with the fire; without heat and light, there isno meaning to the word fire. Similarly, we must discover the essentialpart of the living being, that part which is his constant companion.That constant companion is his eternal quality, and that eternalquality is his eternal religion.
When Sanatana Gosvami asked Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu about the svarupa
of every living being, the Lord replied that the svarupa orconstitutional position of the living being is the rendering of serviceto the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If we analyze this statement ofLord Caitanya's, we can easily see that every living being isconstantly engaged in rendering service to another living being. Aliving being serves other living beings in two capacities. By doing so,the living entity enjoys life. The lower animals serve human beings asservants serve their master. A serves B master, B serves C master and Cserves D master and so on. Under these circumstances, we can see thatone friend serves another friend, the mother serves the son, the wifeserves the husband, the husband serves the wife and so on. If we go onsearching in this spirit, it will be seen that there is no exception inthe society of living beings to the activity of service. The politicianpresents his manifesto for the public to convince them of his capacityfor service. The voters therefore give the politician their valuablevotes, thinking that he will render valuable service to society. Theshopkeeper serves the customer, and the artisan serves the capitalist.The capitalist serves the family, and the family serves the state inthe terms of the eternal capacity of the eternal living being. In thisway we can see that no living being is exempt from rendering service toother living beings, and therefore we can safely conclude that serviceis the constant companion of the living being and that the rendering ofservice is the eternal religion of the living being.
Yet man professes to belong to a particular type of faith with
reference to particular time and circumstance and thus claims to be aHindu, Muslim, Christian, Buddhist or any other sect. Such designationsare non-sanatana-dharma. A Hindu may change his faith to become aMuslim, or a Muslim may change his faith to become a Hindu, or aChristian may change his faith and so on. But in all circumstances thechange of religious faith does not affect the eternal occupation ofrendering service to others. The Hindu, Muslim or Christian in all
circumstances is servant of someone. Thus, to profess a particular type
of sect is not to profess one's sanatana-dharma. The rendering ofservice is sanatana-dharma.
Factually we are related to the Supreme Lord in service. The Supreme
Lord is the supreme enjoyer, and we living entities are His servitors.We are created for His enjoyment, and if we participate in that eternalenjoyment with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, we become happy. Wecannot become happy otherwise. It is not possible to be happyindependently, just as no one part of the body can be happy withoutcooperating with the stomach. It is not possible for the living entityto be happy without rendering transcendental loving service unto theSupreme Lord.
In the Bhagavad-gita, worship of different demigods or rendering
service to them is not approved. It is stated in the Seventh Chapter,twentieth verse:
kamais tais tair hrta-jnanah
prapadyante 'nya-devatah
tam tam niyamam asthaya
prakrtya niyatah svaya
"Those whose minds are distorted by material desires surrender untodemigods and follow the particular rules and regulations of worshipaccording to their own natures." Here it is plainly said that those whoare directed by lust worship the demigods and not the Supreme LordKrsna. When we mention the name Krsna, we do not refer to any sectarianname. Krsna means the highest pleasure, and it is confirmed that theSupreme Lord is the reservoir or storehouse of all pleasure. We are allhankering after pleasure. Ananda-mayo 'bhyasat (Vedanta-sutra 1.1.12).The living entities, like the Lord, are full of consciousness, and theyare after happiness. The Lord is perpetually happy, and if the livingentities associate with the Lord, cooperate with Him and take part inHis association, then they also become happy.
The Lord descends to this mortal world to show His pastimes in
Vrndavana, which are full of happiness. When Lord Sri Krsna was inVrndavana, His activities with His cowherd boyfriends, with His damselfriends, with the inhabitants of Vrndavana and with the cows were allfull of happiness. The total population of Vrndavana knew nothing butKrsna. But Lord Krsna even discouraged His father Nanda Maharaja fromworshiping the demigod Indra because He wanted to establish the factthat people need not worship any demigod. They need only worship theSupreme Lord because their ultimate goal is to return to His abode.
The abode of Lord Sri Krsna is described in the Bhagavad-gita,
Fifteenth Chapter, sixth verse:
na tad bhasayate suryo
na sasanko na pavakah
yad gatva na nivartante
tad dhama paramam mama
"That abode of Mine is not illumined by the sun or moon, nor byelectricity and anyone who reaches it never comes back to this materialworld."
This verse gives a description of that eternal sky. Of course we have a
material conception of the sky, and we think of it in relationship tothe sun, moon, stars and so on, but in this verse the Lord states thatin the eternal sky there is no need for the sun nor for the moon norfire of any kind because the spiritual sky is already illuminated bythe brahmajyoti, the rays emanating from the Supreme Lord. We aretrying with difficulty to reach other planets, but it is not difficultto understand the abode of the Supreme Lord. This abode is referred toas Goloka. In the Brahma-samhita (5.37) it is beautifully described:goloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhutah. The Lord resides eternally in Hisabode Goloka, yet He can be approached from this world, and to this endthe Lord comes to manifest His real form, sac-cid-ananda-vigraha. WhenHe manifests this form, there is no need for our imagining what Helooks like. To discourage such imaginative speculation, He descends andexhibits Himself as He is, as Syamasundara. Unfortunately, the lessintelligent deride Him because He comes as one of us and plays with usas a human being. But because of this we should not consider that theLord is one of us. It is by His omnipotency that He presents Himself inHis real form before us and displays His pastimes, which are prototypesof those pastimes found in His abode.
In the effulgent rays of the spiritual sky there are innumerable
planets floating. The brahmajyoti emanates from the supreme abode,Krsnaloka, and the anandamaya-cinmaya planets, which are not material,float in those rays. The Lord says, na tad bhasayate suryo na sasankona pavakah. yad gatva na nivartante tad dhama paramam mama. One who canapproach that spiritual sky is not required to descend again to thematerial sky. In the material sky, even if we approach the highestplanet (Brahmaloka), what to speak of the moon, we will find the sameconditions of life, namely birth, death, disease and old age. No planetin the material universe is free from these four principles of materialexistence. Therefore the Lord says in Bhagavad-gita, abrahma-bhuvanallokah punar avartino 'rjuna. The living entities are traveling from oneplanet to another, not by a mechanical arrangement but by a spiritualprocess. This is also mentioned: yanti deva-vrata devan pitrn yantipitr-vratah. No mechanical arrangement is necessary if we wantinterplanetary travel. The Gita instructs: yanti deva-vrata devan. Themoon, the sun and higher planets are called Svargaloka. There are threedifferent statuses of planets: higher, middle and lower planetarysystems. The earth belongs to the middle planetary system. Bhagavad-gita informs us how to travel to the higher planetary systems(Devaloka) with a very simple formula: yanti deva-vrata devan. One needonly worship the particular demigod of that particular planet and inthat way go to the moon, the sun or any of the higher planetarysystems.
Yet Bhagavad-gita does not advise us to go to any of the planets in
this material world because even if we go to Brahmaloka, the highestplanet, through some sort of mechanical contrivance by maybe travelingfor forty thousand years (and who would live that long?), we will stillfind the material inconveniences of birth, death, disease and old age.But one who wants to approach the supreme planet, Krsnaloka, or any ofthe other planets within the spiritual sky, will not meet with thesematerial inconveniences. Amongst all of the planets in the spiritualsky there is one supreme planet called Goloka Vrndavana, which is theoriginal planet in the abode of the original Personality of Godhead SriKrsna. All of this information is given in Bhagavad-gita, and we are
given through its instruction information how to leave the material
world and begin a truly blissful life in the spiritual sky.
In the Fifteenth Chapter of the Bhagavad-gita, the real picture of the
material world is given. It is said there:
urdhva-mulam adhah-sakham
asvattham prahur avyayam
chandamsi yasya parnani
yas tam veda sa veda-vit
"The Supreme Lord said: There is a banyan tree which has its rootsupward and its branches down, and the Vedic hymns are its leaves. Onewho knows this tree is the knower of the Vedas." (Bg 15.1) Here thematerial world is described as a tree whose roots are upwards andbranches are below. We have experience of a tree whose roots areupward: if one stands on the bank of a river or any reservoir of water,he can see that the trees reflected in the water are upside down. Thebranches go downward and the roots upward. Similarly, this materialworld is a reflection of the spiritual world. The material world is buta shadow of reality. In the shadow there is no reality orsubstantiality, but from the shadow we can understand that there issubstance and reality. In the desert there is no water, but the miragesuggests that there is such a thing as water. In the material worldthere is no water, there is no happiness, but the real water of actualhappiness is there in the spiritual world.
The Lord suggests that we attain the spiritual world in the following
manner (Bg. 15.5):
nirmana-moha jita-sanga-dosa
adhyatma-nitya vinivrtta-kamah
dvandvair vimuktah sukha-duhkha-samjnair
gacchanty amudhah padam avyayam tat
That padam avyayam or eternal kingdom can be reached by one who isnirmana-moha. What does this mean? We are after designations. Someonewants to become "sir," someone wants to become "lord," someone wants tobecome the president or a rich man or a king or something else. As longas we are attached to these designations, we are attached to the bodybecause designations belong to the body. But we are not these bodies,and realizing this is the first stage in spiritual realization. We areassociated with the three modes of material nature, but we must becomedetached through devotional service to the Lord. If we are not attachedto devotional service to the Lord, then we cannot become detached fromthe modes of material nature. Designations and attachments are due toour lust and desire, our wanting to lord it over the material nature.As long as we do not give up this propensity of lording it overmaterial nature, there is no possibility of returning to the kingdom ofthe Supreme, the sanatana-dhama. That eternal kingdom, which is neverdestroyed, can be approached by one who is not bewildered by theattractions of false material enjoyments, who is situated in theservice of the Supreme Lord. One so situated can easily approach thatsupreme abode.
Elsewhere in the Gita (8.21) it is stated:
avyakto 'ksara ity uktas
tam ahuh paramam gatim
yam prapya na nivartante
tad dhama paramam mama
Avyakta means unmanifested. Not even all of the material world ismanifested before us. Our senses are so imperfect that we cannot evensee all of the stars within this material universe. In Vedic literaturewe can receive much information about all the planets, and we canbelieve it or not believe it. All of the important planets aredescribed in Vedic literatures, especially Srimad-Bhagavatam, and thespiritual world, which is beyond this material sky, is described asavyakta, unmanifested. One should desire and hanker after that supremekingdom, for when one attains that kingdom, he does not have to returnto this material world.
Next, one may raise the question of how one goes about approaching that
abode of the Supreme Lord. Information of this is given in the EighthChapter. It is said there:
anta-kale ca mam eva
smaran muktva kalevaram
yah prayati sa mad-bhavam
yati nasty atra samsayah
"Anyone who quits his body, at the end of life, remembering Me, attainsimmediately to My nature; and there is no doubt of this." (Bg. 8.5) Onewho thinks of Krsna at the time of his death goes to Krsna. One mustremember the form of Krsna; if he quits his body thinking of this form,he approaches the spiritual kingdom. Mad-bhavam refers to the supremenature of the Supreme Being. The Supreme Being is sac-cid-ananda-vigraha--eternal, full of knowledge and bliss. Our present body is notsac-cid-ananda. It is asat, not sat. It is not eternal; it isperishable. It is not cit, full of knowledge, but it is full ofignorance. We have no knowledge of the spiritual kingdom, nor do weeven have perfect knowledge of this material world where there are somany things unknown to us. The body is also nirananda; instead of beingfull of bliss it is full of misery. All of the miseries we experiencein the material world arise from the body, but one who leaves this bodythinking of the Supreme Personality of Godhead at once attains a sac-cid-ananda body, as is promised in the fifth verse of the Eight Chapterwhere Lord Krsna says, "He attains My nature."
The process of quitting this body and getting another body in the
material world is also organized. A man dies after it has been decidedwhat form of body he will have in the next life. Higher authorities,not the living entity himself, make this decision. According to ouractivities in this life, we either rise or sink. This life is apreparation for the next life. If we can prepare, therefore, in thislife to get promotion to the kingdom of God, then surely, afterquitting this material body, we will attain a spiritual body just likethe Lord's.
As explained before, there are different kinds of transcendentalists,
the brahma-vadi, paramatma-vadi, and the devotee, and, as mentioned, inthe brahmajyoti (spiritual sky) there are innumerable spiritualplanets. The number of these planets is far, far greater than all ofthe planets of this material world. This material world has beenapproximated as only one quarter of the creation (ekamsena sthito
jagat). In this material segment there are millions and billions of
universes with trillions of planets and suns, stars and moons. But thiswhole material creation is only a fragment of the total creation. Mostof the creation is in the spiritual sky. One who desires to merge intothe existence of the Supreme Brahman is at once transferred to thebrahmajyoti of the Supreme Lord and thus attains the spiritual sky. Thedevotee, who wants to enjoy the association of the Lord, enters intothe Vaikuntha planets, which are innumerable, and the Supreme Lord byHis plenary expansions as Narayana with four hands and with differentnames like Pradyumna, Aniruddha, Govinda, etc., associates with himthere. Therefore at the end of life the transcendentalists either thinkof the brahmajyoti, the Paramatma or the Supreme Personality of GodheadSri Krsna. In all cases they enter into the spiritual sky, but only thedevotee, or he who is in personal touch with the Supreme Lord, entersinto the Vaikuntha planets. The Lord further adds that of this "thereis no doubt." This must be believed firmly. We should not reject thatwhich does not tally with our imagination; our attitude should be thatof Arjuna: "I believe everything that You have said." Therefore whenthe Lord says that at the time of death whoever thinks of Him asBrahman or Paramatma or as the Personality of Godhead certainly entersinto the spiritual sky, there is no doubt about it. There is noquestion of disbelieving it.
The information on how to think of the Supreme Being at the time of
death is also given in the Gita (8.6):
yam yam vapi smaran bhavam
tyajaty ante kalevaram
tam tam evaiti kaunteya
sada tad-bhava-bhavitah
"In whatever condition one quits his present body, in his next life hewill attain to that state of being without fail." Material nature is adisplay of one of the energies of the Supreme Lord. In the Visnu Purana(6.7.61) the total energies of the Supreme Lord are delineated:
visnu-saktih para prokta
ksetra-jnakhya tatha para
avidya-karma-samjnanya
trtiya saktir isyate
The Supreme Lord has diverse and innumerable energies which are beyondour conception; however, great learned sages or liberated souls havestudied these energies and have analyzed them into three parts. All ofthe energies are of visnu-sakti, that is to say they are differentpotencies of Lord Visnu. That energy is para, transcendental. Livingentities also belong to the superior energy, as has already beenexplained. The other energies, or material energies, are in the mode ofignorance. At the time of death we can either remain in the inferiorenergy of this material world, or we can transfer to the energy of thespiritual world.
In life we are accustomed to thinking either of the material or the
spiritual energy. There are so many literatures which fill our thoughtswith the material energy--newspapers, magazines, novels, etc. Ourthinking, which is now absorbed in these literatures, must betransferred to the Vedic literatures. The great sages, therefore, havewritten so many Vedic literatures such as the Puranas, etc. The Puranas
are not imaginative; they are historical records. In the Caitanya-
caritamrta (Madhya 20.122) there is the following verse:
maya-mugdha jivera nahi svatah krsna-jnana
jivere krpaya kaila krsna veda-purana
The forgetful living entities or conditioned souls have forgotten theirrelationship with the Supreme Lord, and they are engrossed in thinkingof material activities. Just to transfer their thinking power to thespiritual sky, Krsna-dvaipayana Vyasa has given a great number of Vedicliteratures. First he divided the Vedas into four, then he explainedthem in the Puranas, and for less capable people he wrote theMahabharata. In the Mahabharata there is given the Bhagavad-gita. Thenall Vedic literature is summarized in the Vedanta-sutra, and for futureguidance he gave a natural commentation on the Vedanta-sutra, calledSrimad-Bhagavatam. We must always engage our minds in reading theseVedic literatures. Just as materialists engage their minds in readingnewspapers, magazines and so many materialistic literatures, we musttransfer our reading to these literatures which are given to us byVyasadeva; in that way it will be possible for us to remember theSupreme Lord at the time of death. That is the only way suggested bythe Lord, and He guarantees the result: "There is no doubt."
tasmat sarvesu kalesu
mam anusmara yudhya ca
mayy arpita-mano-buddhir
mam evaisyasy asamsayah
"Therefore, Arjuna, you should always think of Me, and at the same timeyou should continue your prescribed duty and fight. With your mind andactivities always fixed on Me and everything engaged in Me, you willattain to Me without any doubt." (Bg. 8.7)
He does not advise Arjuna to simply remember Him and give up his
occupation. No, the Lord never suggests anything impractical. In thismaterial world, in order to maintain the body one has to work. Humansociety is divided, according to work, into four divisions of socialorder--brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya, sudra. The brahmana class orintelligent class is working in one way, the ksatriya or administrativeclass is working in another way, and the mercantile class and thelaborers are all tending to their specific duties. In the humansociety, whether one is a laborer, merchant, warrior, administrator, orfarmer, or even if one belongs to the highest class and is a literaryman, a scientist or a theologian, he has to work in order to maintainhis existence. The Lord therefore tells Arjuna that he need not give uphis occupation, but while he is engaged in his occupation he shouldremember Krsna (mam anusmara). If he doesn't practice remembering Krsnawhile he is struggling for existence, then it will not be possible forhim to remember Krsna at the time of death. Lord Caitanya also advisesthis. He says, kirtaniyah sada harih: one should practice rememberingthe Lord by chanting the names of the Lord always. The names of theLord and the Lord are nondifferent. So Lord Krsna's instructions toArjuna to "remember Me" and Lord Caitanya's injunction to "always chantthe names of Lord Krsna" are the same instruction. There is nodifference, because Krsna and Krsna's name are nondifferent. In theabsolute status there is no difference between reference and referent.Therefore we have to practice remembering the Lord always, twenty-four
hours a day, by chanting His names and molding our life's activities in
such a way that we can remember Him always.
How is this possible? The acaryas give the following example. If a
married woman is attached to another man, or if a man has an attachmentfor a woman other than his wife, then the attachment is to beconsidered very strong. One with such an attachment is always thinkingof the loved one. The wife who is thinking of her lover is alwaysthinking of meeting him, even while she is carrying out her householdchores. In fact, she carries out her household work even more carefullyso her husband will not suspect her attachment. Similarly, we shouldalways remember the supreme lover, Sri Krsna, and at the same timeperform our material duties very nicely. A strong sense of love isrequired here. If we have a strong sense of love for the Supreme Lord,then we can discharge our duty and at the same time remember Him. Butwe have to develop that sense of love. Arjuna, for instance, was alwaysthinking of Krsna; he was the constant companion of Krsna, and at thesame time he was a warrior. Krsna did not advise him to give upfighting and go to the forest to meditate. When Lord Krsna delineatesthe yoga system to Arjuna, Arjuna says that the practice of this systemis not possible for him.
arjuna uvaca
yo 'yam yogas tvaya proktah
samyena madhusudana
etasyaham na pasyami
cancalatvat sthitim sthiram
"Arjuna said, O Madhusudana, the system of yoga which You havesummarized appears impractical and unendurable to me, for the mind isrestless and unsteady." (Bg. 6.33)
But the Lord says:
yoginam api sarvesam
mad-gatenantaratmana
sraddhavan bhajate yo mam
sa me yuktatamo matah
"Of all yogis, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshipingMe in transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Mein yoga, and is the highest of all." (Bg. 6.47) So one who thinks ofthe Supreme Lord always is the greatest yogi, the supermost jnani, andthe greatest devotee at the same time. The Lord further tells Arjunathat as a ksatriya he cannot give up his fighting, but if Arjuna fightsremembering Krsna, then he will be able to remember Him at the time ofdeath. But one must be completely surrendered in the transcendentalloving service of the Lord.
We work not with our body, actually, but with our mind and
intelligence. So if the intelligence and the mind are always engaged inthe thought of the Supreme Lord, then naturally the senses are alsoengaged in His service. Superficially, at least, the activities of thesenses remain the same, but the consciousness is changed. The Bhagavad-gita teaches one how to absorb the mind and intelligence in the thoughtof the Lord. Such absorption will enable one to transfer himself to thekingdom of the Lord. If the mind is engaged in Krsna's service, thenthe senses are automatically engaged in His service. This is the art,
and this is also the secret of Bhagavad-gita: total absorption in the
thought of Sri Krsna.
Modern man has struggled very hard to reach the moon, but he has not
tried very hard to elevate himself spiritually. If one has fifty yearsof life ahead of him, he should engage that brief time in cultivatingthis practice of remembering the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thispractice is the devotional process of:
sravanam kirtanam visnoh
smaranam pada-sevanam
arcanam vandanam dasyam
sakhyam atma-nivedanam
(Srimad-Bhagavatam 7.5.23)
These nine processes, of which the easiest is sravanam, hearing
Bhagavad-gita from the realized person, will turn one to the thought ofthe Supreme Being. This will lead to nisala, remembering the SupremeLord, and will enable one, upon leaving the body, to attain a spiritualbody which is just fit for association with the Supreme Lord.
The Lord further says:
abhyasa-yoga-yuktena
cetasa nanya-gamina
paramam purusam divyam
yati parthanucintayan
"By practicing this remembering, without being deviated, thinking everof the Supreme Godhead, one is sure to achieve the planet of theDivine, the Supreme Personality, O son of Kunti." (Bg. 8.8)
This is not a very difficult process. However, one must learn it from
an experienced person, from one who is already in the practice. Themind is always flying to this and that, but one must always practiceconcentrating the mind on the form of the Supreme Lord, Sri Krsna, oron the sound of His name. The mind is naturally restless, going hitherand thither, but it can rest in the sound vibration of Krsna. One mustthus meditate on paramam purusam, the Supreme Person, and thus attainHim. The ways and the means for ultimate realization, ultimateattainment, are stated in the Bhagavad-gita, and the doors of thisknowledge are open for everyone. No one is barred out. All classes ofmen can approach the Lord by thinking of Him, for hearing and thinkingof Him is possible for everyone.
The Lord further says (Bg. 9.32-33):
mam hi partha vyapasritya
ye 'pi syuh papa-yonayah
striyo vaisyas tatha sudras
te 'pi yanti param gatim
kim punar brahmanah punya
bhakta rajarsayas tatha
anityam asukham lokam
imam prapya bhajasva mam
"O son of Prtha, anyone who will take shelter in Me, whether a woman,
or a merchant, or one born in a low family, can yet approach thesupreme destination. How much greater then are the brahmanas, therighteous, the devotees, and saintly Kings! In this miserable world,these are fixed in devotional service to the Lord."
Human beings even in the lower statuses of life (a merchant, a woman or
a laborer) can attain the Supreme. One does not need highly developedintelligence. The point is that anyone who accepts the principle ofbhakti-yoga and accepts the Supreme Lord as the summum bonum of life,as the highest target, the ultimate goal, can approach the Lord in thespiritual sky. If one adopts the principles enunciated in Bhagavad-gita, he can make his life perfect and make a perfect solution to allthe problems of life which arise out of the transient nature ofmaterial existence. This is the sum and substance of the entireBhagavad-gita.
In conclusion, Bhagavad-gita is a transcendental literature which one
should read very carefully. It is capable of saving one from all fear.
nehabhikrama-naso 'sti pratyavayo na vidyate
svalpam apy asya dharmasya trayate mahato bhayat
"In this endeavor there is no loss or diminution, and a littleadvancement on this path can protect one from the most dangerous typeof fear." (Bg. 2.40) If one reads Bhagavad-gita sincerely andseriously, then all of the reactions of his past misdeeds will notreact upon him. In the last portion of Bhagavad-gita (18.66), Lord SriKrsna proclaims:
sarva-dharman parityajya
mam ekam saranam vraja
aham tvam sarva-papebhyo
moksayisyami ma sucah
"Give up all varieties of religiousness, and just surrender unto Me;and in return I shall protect you from all sinful reactions. Therefore,you have nothing to fear." Thus the Lord takes all responsibility forone who surrenders unto Him, and He indemnifies all the reactions ofsin.
One cleanses himself daily by taking a bath in water, but one who takes
his bath only once in the sacred Ganges water of the Bhagavad-gitacleanses away all the dirt of material life. Because Bhagavad-gita isspoken by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one need not read anyother Vedic literature. One need only attentively and regularly hearand read Bhagavad-gita. In the present age, mankind is so absorbed withmundane activities that it is not possible to read all of the Vedicliteratures. But this is not necessary. This one book, Bhagavad-gita,will suffice because it is the essence of all Vedic literatures andbecause it is spoken by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is saidthat one who drinks the water of the Ganges certainly gets salvation,but what to speak of one who drinks the waters of Bhagavad-gita? Gitais the very nectar of the Mahabharata spoken by Visnu Himself, for LordKrsna is the original Visnu. It is nectar emanating from the mouth ofthe Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the Ganges is said to beemanating from the lotus feet of the Lord. Of course there is no
difference between the mouth and the feet of the Supreme Lord, but in
our position we can appreciate that the Bhagavad-gita is even moreimportant than the Ganges.
The Bhagavad-gita is just like a cow, and Lord Krsna, who is a cowherd
boy, is milking this cow. The milk is the essence of the Vedas, andArjuna is just like a calf. The wise men, the great sages and puredevotees, are to drink the nectarean milk of Bhagavad-gita.
In this present day, man is very eager to have one scripture, one God,
one religion, and one occupation. So let there be one common scripturefor the whole world--Bhagavad-gita. And let there be one God only forthe whole world--Sri Krsna. And one mantra only--Hare Krsna, HareKrsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, HareHare. And let there be one work only--the service of the SupremePersonality of Godhead.
THE DISCIPLIC SUCCESSION
Evam parampara-praptam imam rajarsayo viduh (Bhagavad-gita 4.2). This
Bhagavad-gita As It Is is received through this disciplic succession:
1. Krsna 17. Brahmanya Tirtha
2. Brahma 18. Vyasa Tirtha3. Narada 19. Laksmipati4. Vyasa 20. Madhavendra Puri5. Madhva 21. Isvara Puri, (Nityananda,
Advaita)
6. Padmanabha 22. Lord Caitanya7. Nrhari 23. Rupa, (Svarupa, Sanatana)8. Madhava 24. Raghunatha, Jiva9. Aksobhya 25. Krsnadasa10. Jaya Tirtha 26. Narottama11. Jnanasindhu 27. Visvanatha12. Dayanidhi 28. (Baladeva) Jagannatha13. Vidyanidhi 29. Bhaktivinoda14. Rajendra 30. Gaurakisora15. Jayadharma 31. Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati16. Purusottama 32. His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada
Chapter 1
Observing the Armies on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra
TEXT 1
dhrtarastra uvaca
dharma-ksetre kuru-ksetresamaveta yuyutsavahmamakah pandavas caivakim akurvata sanjaya
SYNONYMSdhrtarastrah--King Dhrtarastra; uvaca--said; dharma-ksetre--in the
place of pilgrimage; kuru-ksetre--in the place named Kuruksetra;samavetah--assembled; yuyutsavah--desiring to fight; mamakah--my party(sons); pandavah--the sons of Pandu; ca--and; eva--certainly; kim--what; akurvata--did they do; sanjaya--O Sanjaya.
TRANSLATIONDhrtarastra said: O Sanjaya, after assembling in the place of
pilgrimage at Kuruksetra, what did my sons and the sons of Pandu do,being desirous to fight?
PURPORTBhagavad-gita is the widely read theistic science summarized in the
Gita-mahatmya (Glorification of the Gita). There it says that oneshould read Bhagavad-gita very scrutinizingly with the help of a personwho is a devotee of Sri Krsna and try to understand it withoutpersonally motivated interpretations. The example of clearunderstanding is there in the Bhagavad-gita itself, in the way theteaching is understood by Arjuna, who heard the Gita directly from theLord. If someone is fortunate enough to understand Bhagavad-gita inthat line of disciplic succession, without motivated interpretation,then he surpasses all studies of Vedic wisdom, and all scriptures ofthe world. One will find in the Bhagavad-gita all that is contained inother scriptures, but the reader will also find things which are not tobe found elsewhere. That is the specific standard of the Gita. It isthe perfect theistic science because it is directly spoken by theSupreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Sri Krsna.The topics discussed by Dhrtarastra and Sanjaya, as described in theMahabharata, form the basic principle for this great philosophy. It isunderstood that this philosophy evolved on the Battlefield ofKuruksetra, which is a sacred place of pilgrimage from the immemorialtime of the Vedic age. It was spoken by the Lord when He was presentpersonally on this planet for the guidance of mankind.The word dharma-ksetra (a place where religious rituals are performed)is significant because, on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra, the SupremePersonality of Godhead was present on the side of Arjuna. Dhrtarastra,the father of the Kurus, was highly doubtful about the possibility ofhis sons' ultimate victory. In his doubt, he inquired from hissecretary Sanjaya, "What did my sons and the sons of Pandu do?" He wasconfident that both his sons and the sons of his younger brother Panduwere assembled in that Field of Kuruksetra for a determined engagementof war. Still, his inquiry is significant. He did not want a compromisebetween the cousins and brothers, and he wanted to be sure of the fate
of his sons on the battlefield. Because the battle was arranged to be
fought at Kuruksetra, which is mentioned elsewhere in the Vedas as aplace of worship--even for the denizens of heaven--Dhrtarastra becamevery fearful about the influence of the holy place on the outcome ofthe battle. He knew very well that this would influence Arjuna and thesons of Pandu favorably, because by nature they were all virtuous.Sanjaya was a student of Vyasa, and therefore, by the mercy of Vyasa,Sanjaya was able to envision the Battlefield of Kuruksetra even whilehe was in the room of Dhrtarastra. And so, Dhrtarastra asked him aboutthe situation on the battlefield.Both the Pandavas and the sons of Dhrtarastra belong to the samefamily, but Dhrtarastra's mind is disclosed herein. He deliberatelyclaimed only his sons as Kurus, and he separated the sons of Pandu fromthe family heritage. One can thus understand the specific position ofDhrtarastra in his relationship with his nephews, the sons of Pandu. Asin the paddy field the unnecessary plants are taken out, so it isexpected from the very beginning of these topics that in the religiousfield of Kuruksetra where the father of religion, Sri Krsna, waspresent, the unwanted plants like Dhrtarastra's son Duryodhana andothers would be wiped out and the thoroughly religious persons, headedby Yudhisthira, would be established by the Lord. This is thesignificance of the words dharma-ksetre and kuru-ksetre, apart fromtheir historical and Vedic importance.
TEXT 2
sanjaya uvaca
drstva tu pandavanikamvyudham duryodhanas tadaacaryam upasangamyaraja vacanam abravit
SYNONYMSsanjayah--Sanjaya; uvaca--said; drstva--after seeing; tu--but; pandava-
anikam--the soldiers of the Pandavas; vyudham--arranged in militaryphalanx; duryodhanah--King Duryodhana; tada--at that time; acaryam--theteacher; upasangamya--approaching nearby; raja--the king; vacanam--words; abravit--spoke.
TRANSLATIONSanjaya said: O King, after looking over the army gathered by the sons
of Pandu, King Duryodhana went to his teacher and began to speak thefollowing words:
PURPORTDhrtarastra was blind from birth. Unfortunately, he was also bereft of
spiritual vision. He knew very well that his sons were equally blind inthe matter of religion, and he was sure that they could never reach anunderstanding with the Pandavas, who were all pious since birth. Stillhe was doubtful about the influence of the place of pilgrimage, andSanjaya could understand his motive in asking about the situation onthe battlefield. He wanted, therefore, to encourage the despondentking, and thus he warned him that his sons were not going to make anysort of compromise under the influence of the holy place. Sanjayatherefore informed the king that his son, Duryodhana, after seeing the
military force of the Pandavas, at once went to the commander in chief,
Dronacarya, to inform him of the real position. Although Duryodhana ismentioned as the king, he still had to go to the commander on accountof the seriousness of the situation. He was therefore quite fit to be apolitician. But Duryodhana's diplomatic veneer could not disguise thefear he felt when he saw the military arrangement of the Pandavas.
TEXT 3
pasyaitam pandu-putranam
acarya mahatim camumvyudham drupada-putrenatava sisyena dhimata
SYNONYMSpasya--behold; etam--this; pandu-putranam--of the sons of Pandu;
acarya--O teacher; mahatim--great; camum--military force; vyudham--arranged; drupada-putrena--by the son of Drupada; tava--your; sisyena--disciple; dhi-mata--very intelligent.
TRANSLATIONO my teacher, behold the great army of the sons of Pandu, so expertly
arranged by your intelligent disciple, the son of Drupada.
PURPORTDuryodhana, a great diplomat, wanted to point out the defects of
Dronacarya, the great brahmana commander in chief. Dronacarya had somepolitical quarrel with King Drupada, the father of Draupadi, who wasArjuna's wife. As a result of this quarrel, Drupada performed a greatsacrifice, by which he received the benediction of having a son whowould be able to kill Dronacarya. Dronacarya knew this perfectly well,and yet, as a liberal brahmana, he did not hesitate to impart all hismilitary secrets when the son of Drupada, Dhrstadyumna, was entrustedto him for military education. Now, on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra,Dhrstadyumna took the side of the Pandavas, and it was he who arrangedfor their military phalanx, after having learned the art fromDronacarya. Duryodhana pointed out this mistake of Dronacarya's so thathe might be alert and uncompromising in the fighting. By this he wantedto point out also that he should not be similarly lenient in battleagainst the Pandavas, who were also Dronacarya's affectionate students.Arjuna, especially, was his most affectionate and brilliant student.Duryodhana also warned that such leniency in the fight would lead todefeat.
TEXT 4
atra sura mahesvasa
bhimarjuna-sama yudhiyuyudhano viratas cadrupadas ca maha-rathah
SYNONYMSatra--here; surah--heroes; maha-isu-asah--mighty bowmen; bhima-arjuna--
Bhima and Arjuna; samah--equal; yudhi--in the fight; yuyudhanah--
Yuyudhana; viratah--Virata; ca--also; drupadah--Drupada; ca--also;
maha-rathah--great fighter.
TRANSLATIONHere in this army there are many heroic bowmen equal in fighting to
Bhima and Arjuna; there are also great fighters like Yuyudhana, Virataand Drupada.
PURPORTEven though Dhrstadyumna was not a very important obstacle in the face
of Dronacarya's very great power in the military art, there were manyothers who were the cause of fear. They are mentioned by Duryodhana asgreat stumbling blocks on the path of victory because each and everyone of them was as formidable as Bhima and Arjuna. He knew the strengthof Bhima and Arjuna, and thus he compared the others with them.
TEXT 5
dhrstaketus cekitanah
kasirajas ca viryavanpurujit kuntibhojas casaibyas ca nara-pungavah
SYNONYMSdhrstaketuh--Dhrstaketu; cekitanah--Cekitana; kasirajah--Kasiraja; ca--
also; virya-van--very powerful; purujit--Purujit; kuntibhojah--Kuntibhoja; ca--and; saibyah--Saibya; ca--and; nara-pungavah--heroes inhuman society.
TRANSLATIONThere are also great, heroic, powerful fighters like Dhrstaketu,
Cekitana, Kasiraja, Purujit, Kuntibhoja and Saibya.
TEXT 6
yudhamanyus ca vikranta
uttamaujas ca viryavansaubhadro draupadeyas casarva eva maha-rathah
SYNONYMSyudhamanyuh--Yudhamanyu; ca--and; vikrantah--mighty; uttamaujah--
Uttamauja; ca--and; virya-van--very powerful; saubhadrah--the son ofSubhadra; draupadeyah--the sons of Draupadi; ca--and; sarve--all; eva--certainly; maha-rathah--great chariot fighters.
TRANSLATION
There are the mighty Yudhamanyu, the very powerful Uttamauja, the son
of Subhadra and the sons of Draupadi. All these warriors are greatchariot fighters.
TEXT 7
asmakam tu visista ye
tan nibodha dvijottamanayaka mama sainyasyasamjnartham tan bravimi te
SYNONYMSasmakam--our; tu--but; visistah--especially powerful; ye--those; tan--
them; nibodha--just take note, be informed; dvija-uttama--the best ofthe brahmanas; nayakah--captains; mama--my; sainyasya--of the soldiers;samjna-artham--for information; tan--them; bravimi--I am speaking; te--your.
TRANSLATIONO best of the brahmanas, for your information, let me tell you about
the captains who are especially qualified to lead my military force.
TEXT 8
bhavan bhismas ca karnas ca
krpas ca samitim-jayahasvatthama vikarnas casaumadattis tathaiva ca
SYNONYMSbhavan--your self; bhismah--Grandfather Bhisma; ca--also; karnah--
Karna; ca--and; krpah--Krpa; ca--and; samitim-jayah--always victoriousin battle; asvatthama--Asvatthama; vikarnah--Vikarna; ca--as well as;saumadattih--the son of Somadatta; tatha--and as; eva--certainly; ca--and.
TRANSLATIONThere are personalities like yourself, Bhisma, Karna, Krpa, Asvatthama,
Vikarna and the son of Somadatta called Bhurisrava, who are alwaysvictorious in battle.
PURPORTDuryodhana mentions the exceptional heroes in the battle, all of whom
are ever victorious. Vikarna is the brother of Duryodhana, Asvatthamais the son of Dronacarya, and Saumadatti, or Bhurisrava, is the son ofthe King of the Bahlikas. Karna is the half brother of Arjuna, as hewas born of Kunti before her marriage with King Pandu. Krpacarya's twinsister married Dronacarya.
TEXT 9
anye ca bahavah sura
mad-arthe tyakta-jivitahnana-sastra-praharanahsarve yuddha-visaradah
SYNONYMS
anye--many others; ca--also; bahavah--in great numbers; surah--heroes;
mat-arthe--for my sake; tyakta-jivitah--prepared to risk life; nana--many; sastra--weapons; praharanah--equipped with; sarve--all of them;yuddha--battle; visaradah--experienced in military science.
TRANSLATIONThere are many other heroes who are prepared to lay down their lives
for my sake. All of them are well equipped with different kinds ofweapons, and all are experienced in military science.
PURPORTAs far as the others are concerned--like Jayadratha, Krtavarma, Salya,
etc.--all are determined to lay down their lives for Duryodhana's sake.In other words, it is already concluded that all of them would die inthe Battle of Kuruksetra for joining the party of the sinfulDuryodhana. Duryodhana was, of course, confident of his victory onaccount of the above-mentioned combined strength of his friends.
TEXT 10
aparyaptam tad asmakam
balam bhismabhiraksitamparyaptam tv idam etesambalam bhimabhiraksitam
SYNONYMSaparyaptam--immeasurable; tat--that; asmakam--of ours; balam--strength;
bhisma--by Grandfather Bhisma; abhiraksitam--perfectly protected;paryaptam--limited; tu--but; idam--all this; etesam--of the Pandavas;balam--strength; bhima--by Bhima; abhiraksitam--carefully protected.
TRANSLATIONOur strength is immeasurable, and we are perfectly protected by
Grandfather Bhisma, whereas the strength of the Pandavas, carefullyprotected by Bhima, is limited.
PURPORTHerein an estimation of comparative strength is made by Duryodhana. He
thinks that the strength of his armed forces is immeasurable, beingspecifically protected by the most experienced general, GrandfatherBhisma. On the other hand, the forces of the Pandavas are limited,being protected by a less experienced general, Bhima, who is like a figin the presence of Bhisma. Duryodhana was always envious of Bhimabecause he knew perfectly well that if he should die at all, he wouldonly be killed by Bhima. But at the same time, he was confident of hisvictory on account of the presence of Bhisma, who was a far superiorgeneral. His conclusion that he would come out of the battle victoriouswas well ascertained.
TEXT 11
ayanesu ca sarvesu
yatha-bhagam avasthitah
bhismam evabhiraksantubhavantah sarva eva hi
SYNONYMSayanesu--in the strategic points; ca--also; sarvesu--everywhere; yatha-
bhagam--as they are differently arranged; avasthitah--situated;bhismam--unto Grandfather Bhisma; eva--certainly; abhiraksantu--supportmay be given; bhavantah--all of you; sarve--respectively; eva--certainly; hi--and exactly.
TRANSLATIONNow all of you must give full support to Grandfather Bhisma, standing
at your respective strategic points in the phalanx of the army.
PURPORTDuryodhana, after praising the prowess of Bhisma, further considered
that others might think that they had been considered less important,so in his usual diplomatic way, he tried to adjust the situation in theabove words. He emphasized that Bhismadeva was undoubtedly the greatesthero, but he was an old man, so everyone must especially think of hisprotection from all sides. He might become engaged in the fight, andthe enemy might take advantage of his full engagement on one side.Therefore, it was important that other heroes would not leave theirstrategic positions and allow the enemy to break the phalanx.Duryodhana clearly felt that the victory of the Kurus depended on thepresence of Bhismadeva. He was confident of the full support ofBhismadeva and Dronacarya in the battle because he well knew that theydid not even speak a word when Arjuna's wife Draupadi, in her helplesscondition, had appealed to them for justice while she was being forcedto appear naked in the presence of all the great generals in theassembly. Although he knew that the two generals had some sort ofaffection for the Pandavas, he hoped that all such affection would nowbe completely given up by them, as was customary during the gamblingperformances.
TEXT 12
tasya sanjanayan harsam
kuru-vrddhah pitamahahsimha-nadam vinadyoccaihsankham dadhmau pratapavan
SYNONYMStasya--his; sanjanayan--increasing; harsam--cheerfulness; kuru-vrddhah-
-the grandsire of the Kuru dynasty (Bhisma); pitamahah--thegrandfather; simha-nadam--roaring sound, like a lion; vinadya--vibrating; uccaih--very loudly; sankham--conchshell; dadhmau--blew;pratapa-van--the valiant.
TRANSLATION
Then Bhisma, the great valiant grandsire of the Kuru dynasty, the
grandfather of the fighters, blew his conchshell very loudly, like thesound of a lion, giving Duryodhana joy.
PURPORTThe grandsire of the Kuru dynasty could understand the inner meaning of
the heart of his grandson Duryodhana, and out of his natural compassionfor him he tried to cheer him by blowing his conchshell very loudly,befitting his position as a lion. Indirectly, by the symbolism of theconchshell, he informed his depressed grandson Duryodhana that he hadno chance of victory in the battle, because the Supreme Lord Krsna wason the other side. But still, it was his duty to conduct the fight, andno pains would be spared in that connection.
TEXT 13
tatah sankhas ca bheryas ca
panavanaka-gomukhahsahasaivabhyahanyantasa sabdas tumulo 'bhavat
SYNONYMStatah--thereafter; sankhah--conchshells; ca--also; bheryah--bugles; ca-
-and; panava-anaka--trumpets and drums; go-mukhah--horns; sahasa--allof a sudden; eva--certainly; abhyahanyanta--being simultaneouslysounded; sah--that; sabdah--combined sound; tumulah--tumultuous;abhavat--became.
TRANSLATIONAfter that, the conchshells, bugles, trumpets, drums and horns were all
suddenly sounded, and the combined sound was tumultuous.
TEXT 14
tatah svetair hayair yukte
mahati syandane sthitaumadhavah pandavas caivadivyau sankhau pradadhmatuh
SYNONYMStatah--thereafter; svetaih--by white; hayaih--horses; yukte--being
yoked; mahati--in a great; syandane--chariot; sthitau--so situated;madhavah--Krsna (the husband of the goddess of fortune); pandavah--Arjuna (the son of Pandu); ca--also; eva--certainly; divyau--transcendental; sankhau--conchshells; pradadhmatuh--sounded.
TRANSLATIONOn the other side, both Lord Krsna and Arjuna, stationed on a great
chariot drawn by white horses, sounded their transcendentalconchshells.
PURPORT
In contrast with the conchshell blown by Bhismadeva, the conchshells in
the hands of Krsna and Arjuna are described as transcendental. Thesounding of the transcendental conchshells indicated that there was nohope of victory for the other side because Krsna was on the side of thePandavas. Jayas tu pandu-putranam yesam pakse janardanah. Victory isalways with persons like the sons of Pandu because Lord Krsna isassociated with them. And whenever and wherever the Lord is present,the goddess of fortune is also there because the goddess of fortunenever lives alone without her husband. Therefore, victory and fortunewere awaiting Arjuna, as indicated by the transcendental sound producedby the conchshell of Visnu, or Lord Krsna. Besides that, the chariot onwhich both the friends were seated was donated by Agni (the fire-god)to Arjuna, and this indicated that this chariot was capable ofconquering all sides, wherever it was drawn over the three worlds.
TEXT 15
pancajanyam hrsikeso
devadattam dhananjayahpaundram dadhmau maha-sankhambhima-karma vrkodarah
SYNONYMSpancajanyam--the conchshell named Pancajanya; hrsika-isah--Hrsikesa
(Krsna, the Lord who directs the senses of the devotees); devadattam--the conchshell named Devadatta; dhanam-jayah--Dhananjaya (Arjuna, thewinner of wealth); paundram--the conch named Paundra; dadhmau--blew;maha-sankham--the terrific conchshell; bhima-karma--one who performsherculean tasks; vrka-udarah--the voracious eater (Bhima).
TRANSLATIONThen, Lord Krsna blew His conchshell, called Pancajanya; Arjuna blew
his, the Devadatta; and Bhima, the voracious eater and performer ofherculean tasks, blew his terrific conchshell called Paundra.
PURPORTLord Krsna is referred to as Hrsikesa in this verse because He is the
owner of all senses. The living entities are part and parcel of Him,and, therefore the senses of the living entities are also part andparcel of His senses. The impersonalists cannot account for the sensesof the living entities, and therefore they are always anxious todescribe all living entities as sense-less, or impersonal. The Lord,situated in the hearts of all living entities, directs their senses.But, He directs in terms of the surrender of the living entity, and inthe case of a pure devotee He directly controls the senses. Here on theBattlefield of Kuruksetra the Lord directly controls the transcendentalsenses of Arjuna, and thus His particular name of Hrsikesa. The Lordhas different names according to His different activities. For example,His name is Madhusudana because He killed the demon of the name Madhu;His name is Govinda because He gives pleasure to the cows and to thesenses; His name is Vasudeva because He appeared as the son ofVasudeva; His name is Devaki-nandana because He accepted Devaki as Hismother; His name is Yasoda-nandana because He awarded His childhoodpastimes to Yasoda at Vrndavana; His name is Partha-sarathi because Heworked as charioteer of His friend Arjuna. Similarly, His name is
Hrsikesa because He gave direction to Arjuna on the Battlefield of
Kuruksetra.Arjuna is referred to as Dhananjaya in this verse because he helped hiselder brother in fetching wealth when it was required by the king tomake expenditures for different sacrifices. Similarly, Bhima is knownas Vrkodara because he could eat as voraciously as he could performherculean tasks, such as killing the demon Hidimba. So, the particulartypes of conchshell blown by the different personalities on the side ofthe Pandavas, beginning with the Lord's, were all very encouraging tothe fighting soldiers. On the other side there were no such credits,nor the presence of Lord Krsna, the supreme director, nor that of thegoddess of fortune. So, they were predestined to lose the battle--andthat was the message announced by the sounds of the conchshells.
TEXTS 16-18
anantavijayam raja
kunti-putro yudhisthirahnakulah sahadevas casughosa-manipuspakau
kasyas ca paramesv-asah
sikhandi ca maha-rathahdhrstadyumno viratas casatyakis caparajitah
drupado draupadeyas ca
sarvasah prthivi-patesaubhadras ca maha-bahuhsankhan dadhmuh prthak prthak
SYNONYMSananta-vijayam--the conch named Ananta-vijaya; raja--the king; kunti-
putrah--the son of Kunti; yudhisthirah--Yudhisthira; nakulah--Nakula;sahadevah--Sahadeva; ca--and; sughosa-manipuspakau--the conches namedSughosa and Manipuspaka; kasyah--the King of Kasi (Varanasi); ca--and;parama-isu-asah--the great archer; sikhandi--Sikhandi; ca--also; maha-rathah--one who can fight alone against thousands; dhrstadyumnah--Dhrstadyumna (the son of King Drupada); viratah--Virata (the prince whogave shelter to the Pandavas while they were in disguise); ca--also;satyakih--Satyaki (the same as Yuyudhana, the charioteer of LordKrsna); ca--and; aparajitah--who were never vanquished before;drupadah--Drupada, the King of Pancala; draupadeyah--the sons ofDraupadi; ca--also; sarvasah--all; prthivi-pate--O King; saubhadrah--the son of Subhadra (Abhimanyu); ca--also; maha-bahuh--mighty-armed;sankhan--conchshells; dadhmuh--blew; prthak prthak--each separately.
TRANSLATIONKing Yudhisthira, the son of Kunti, blew his conchshell, the Ananta-
vijaya, and Nakula and Sahadeva blew the Sughosa and Manipuspaka. Thatgreat archer the King of Kasi, the great fighter Sikhandi,Dhrstadyumna, Virata and the unconquerable Satyaki, Drupada, the sonsof Draupadi, and the others, O King, such as the mighty-armed son ofSubhadra, all blew their respective conchshells.
PURPORT
Sanjaya informed King Dhrtarastra very tactfully that his unwise policy
of deceiving the sons of Pandu and endeavoring to enthrone his own sonson the seat of the kingdom was not very laudable. The signs alreadyclearly indicated that the whole Kuru dynasty would be killed in thatgreat battle. Beginning with the grandsire, Bhisma, down to thegrandsons like Abhimanyu and others--including kings from many statesof the world--all were present there, and all were doomed. The wholecatastrophe was due to King Dhrtarastra, because he encouraged thepolicy followed by his sons.
TEXT 19
sa ghoso dhartarastranam
hrdayani vyadarayatnabhas ca prthivim caivatumulo 'bhyanunadayan
SYNONYMSsah--that; ghosah--vibration; dhartarastranam--of the sons of
Dhrtarastra; hrdayani--hearts; vyadarayat--shattered; nabhah--the sky;ca--also; prthivim--the surface of the earth; ca--also; eva--certainly;tumulah--uproarious; abhyanunadayan--by resounding.
TRANSLATIONThe blowing of these different conchshells became uproarious, and thus,
vibrating both in the sky and on the earth, it shattered the hearts ofthe sons of Dhrtarastra.
PURPORTWhen Bhisma and the others on the side of Duryodhana blew their
respective conchshells, there was no heart-breaking on the part of thePandavas. Such occurrences are not mentioned, but in this particularverse it is mentioned that the hearts of the sons of Dhrtarastra wereshattered by the sounds vibrated by the Pandavas' party. This is due tothe Pandavas and their confidence in Lord Krsna. One who takes shelterof the Supreme Lord has nothing to fear, even in the midst of thegreatest calamity.
TEXT 20
atha vyavasthitan drstva
dhartarastran kapi-dhvajahpravrtte sastra-sampatedhanur udyamya pandavahhrsikesam tada vakyamidam aha mahi-pate
SYNONYMSatha--thereupon; vyavasthitan--situated; drstva--looking upon;
dhartarastran--the sons of Dhrtarastra; kapi-dhvajah--one whose flag ismarked with Hanuman; pravrtte--while about to engage; sastra-sampate--the arrows released; dhanuh--bow; udyamya--after taking up; pandavah--
the son of Pandu (Arjuna); hrsikesam--unto Lord Krsna; tada--at that
time; vakyam--words; idam--these; aha--said; mahi-pate--O King.
TRANSLATIONO King, at that time Arjuna, the son of Pandu, who was seated in his
chariot, bearing the flag marked with Hanuman, took up his bow andprepared to shoot his arrows, looking at the sons of Dhrtarastra. OKing, Arjuna then spoke to Hrsikesa [Krsna] these words:
PURPORTThe battle was just about to begin. It is understood from the above
statement that the sons of Dhrtarastra were more or less disheartenedby the unexpected arrangement of military force by the Pandavas, whowere guided by the direct instructions of Lord Krsna on thebattlefield. The emblem of Hanuman on the flag of Arjuna is anothersign of victory because Hanuman cooperated with Lord Rama in the battlebetween Rama and Ravana, and Lord Rama emerged victorious. Now bothRama and Hanuman were present on the chariot of Arjuna to help him.Lord Krsna is Rama Himself, and wherever Lord Rama is, His eternalservitor Hanuman and His eternal consort Sita, the goddess of fortune,are present. Therefore, Arjuna had no cause to fear any enemieswhatsoever. And above all, the Lord of the senses, Lord Krsna, waspersonally present to give him direction. Thus, all good counsel wasavailable to Arjuna in the matter of executing the battle. In suchauspicious conditions, arranged by the Lord for His eternal devotee,lay the signs of assured victory.
TEXTS 21-22
arjuna uvaca
senayor ubhayor madhyeratham sthapaya me 'cyutayavad etan nirikse 'hamyoddhu-kaman avasthitan
kair maya saha yoddhavyam
asmin rana-samudyame
SYNONYMSarjunah--Arjuna; uvaca--said; senayoh--of the armies; ubhayoh--of both
the parties; madhye--in between them; ratham--the chariot; sthapaya--please keep; me--my; acyuta--O infallible one; yavat--as long as; etan--all these; nirikse--may look; aham--I; yoddhu-kaman--desiring tofight; avasthitan--arrayed on the battlefield; kaih--with whom; maya--by me; saha--with; yoddhavyam--to fight with; asmin--in this; rana--strife; samudyame--in the attempt.
TRANSLATIONArjuna said: O infallible one, please draw my chariot between the two
armies so that I may see who is present here, who is desirous offighting, and with whom I must contend in this great battle attempt.
PURPORT
Although Lord Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, out of His
causeless mercy He was engaged in the service of His friend. He neverfails in His affection for His devotees, and thus He is addressedherein as infallible. As charioteer, He had to carry out the orders ofArjuna, and since He did not hesitate to do so, He is addressed asinfallible. Although He had accepted the position of a charioteer forHis devotee, His supreme position was not challenged. In allcircumstances, He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hrsikesa, theLord of the total senses. The relationship between the Lord and Hisservitor is very sweet and transcendental. The servitor is always readyto render service to the Lord, and, similarly, the Lord is alwaysseeking an opportunity to render some service to the devotee. He takesgreater pleasure in His pure devotee's assuming the advantageousposition of ordering Him than He does in being the giver of orders. Asmaster, everyone is under His orders, and no one is above Him to orderHim. But when He finds that a pure devotee is ordering Him, He obtainstranscendental pleasure, although He is the infallible master of allcircumstances.As a pure devotee of the Lord, Arjuna had no desire to fight with hiscousins and brothers, but he was forced to come onto the battlefield bythe obstinacy of Duryodhana, who was never agreeable to any peacefulnegotiation. Therefore, he was very anxious to see who the leadingpersons present on the battlefield were. Although there was no questionof a peacemaking endeavor on the battlefield, he wanted to see themagain and to see how much they were bent upon demanding an unwantedwar.
TEXT 23
yotsyamanan avekse 'ham
ya ete 'tra samagatahdhartarastrasya durbuddheryuddhe priya-cikirsavah
SYNONYMSyotsyamanan--those who will be fighting; avekse--let me see; aham--I;
ye--who; ete--those; atra--here; samagatah--assembled; dhartarastrasya--the son of Dhrtarastra; durbuddheh--evil-minded; yuddhe--in the fight;priya--well; cikirsavah--wishing.
TRANSLATIONLet me see those who have come here to fight, wishing to please the
evil-minded son of Dhrtarastra.
PURPORTIt was an open secret that Duryodhana wanted to usurp the kingdom of
the Pandavas by evil plans, in collaboration with his father,Dhrtarastra. Therefore, all persons who had joined the side ofDuryodhana must have been birds of the same feather. Arjuna wanted tosee them in the battlefield before the fight was begun, just to learnwho they were, but he had no intention of proposing peace negotiationswith them. It was also a fact that he wanted to see them to make anestimate of the strength which he had to face, although he was quiteconfident of victory because Krsna was sitting by his side.
TEXT 24
sanjaya uvaca
evam ukto hrsikesogudakesena bharatasenayor ubhayor madhyesthapayitva rathottamam
SYNONYMSsanjayah--Sanjaya; uvaca--said; evam--thus; uktah--addressed;
hrsikesah--Lord Krsna; gudakesena--by Arjuna; bharata--O descendant ofBharata; senayoh--of armies; ubhayoh--of both; madhye--in the midst of;sthapayitva--by placing; ratha-uttamam--the finest chariot.
TRANSLATIONSanjaya said: O descendant of Bharata, being thus addressed by Arjuna,
Lord Krsna drew up the fine chariot in the midst of the armies of bothparties.
PURPORTIn this verse Arjuna is referred to as Gudakesa. Gudaka means sleep,
and one who conquers sleep is called gudakesa. Sleep also meansignorance. So Arjuna conquered both sleep and ignorance because of hisfriendship with Krsna. As a great devotee of Krsna, he could not forgetKrsna even for a moment, because that is the nature of a devotee.Either in waking or in sleep, a devotee of the Lord can never be freefrom thinking of Krsna's name, form, qualities and pastimes. Thus adevotee of Krsna can conquer both sleep and ignorance simply bythinking of Krsna constantly. This is called Krsna consciousness, orsamadhi. As Hrsikesa, or the director of the senses and mind of everyliving entity, Krsna could understand Arjuna's purpose in placing thechariot in the midst of the armies. Thus He did so, and spoke asfollows.
TEXT 25
bhisma-drona-pramukhatah
sarvesam ca mahi-ksitamuvaca partha pasyaitansamavetan kurun iti
SYNONYMSbhisma--Grandfather Bhisma; drona--the teacher Drona; pramukhatah--in
front of; sarvesam--all; ca--also; mahi-ksitam--chiefs of the world;uvaca--said; partha--O Partha (son of Prtha); pasya--just behold; etan--all of them; samavetan--assembled; kurun--all the members of the Kurudynasty; iti--thus.
TRANSLATIONIn the presence of Bhisma, Drona and all other chieftains of the world,
Hrsikesa, the Lord, said, Just behold, Partha, all the Kurus who areassembled here.
PURPORT
As the Supersoul of all living entities, Lord Krsna could understand
what was going on in the mind of Arjuna. The use of the word Hrsikesain this connection indicates that He knew everything. And the wordPartha, or the son of Kunti or Prtha, is also similarly significant inreference to Arjuna. As a friend, He wanted to inform Arjuna thatbecause Arjuna was the son of Prtha, the sister of His own fatherVasudeva, He had agreed to be the charioteer of Arjuna. Now what didKrsna mean when He told Arjuna to "behold the Kurus"? Did Arjuna wantto stop there and not fight? Krsna never expected such things from theson of His aunt Prtha. The mind of Arjuna was thus predicted by theLord in friendly joking.
TEXT 26
tatrapasyat sthitan parthah
pitrn atha pitamahanacaryan matulan bhratrnputran pautran sakhims tathasvasuran suhrdas caivasenayor ubhayor api
SYNONYMStatra--there; apasyat--he could see; sthitan--standing; parthah--
Arjuna; pitrn--fathers; atha--also; pitamahan--grandfathers; acaryan--teachers; matulan--maternal uncles; bhratrn--brothers; putran--sons;pautran--grandsons; sakhin--friends; tatha--too; svasuran--fathers-in-law; suhrdah--well-wishers; ca--also; eva--certainly; senayoh--of thearmies; ubhayoh--of both parties; api--including.
TRANSLATIONThere Arjuna could see, within the midst of the armies of both parties,
his fathers, grandfathers, teachers, maternal uncles, brothers, sons,grandsons, friends, and also his father-in-law and well-wishers--allpresent there.
PURPORTOn the battlefield Arjuna could see all kinds of relatives. He could
see persons like Bhurisrava, who were his father's contemporaries,grandfathers Bhisma and Somadatta, teachers like Dronacarya andKrpacarya, maternal uncles like Salya and Sakuni, brothers likeDuryodhana, sons like Laksmana, friends like Asvatthama, well-wisherslike Krtavarma, etc. He could see also the armies which contained manyof his friends.
TEXT 27
tan samiksya sa kaunteyah
sarvan bandhun avasthitankrpaya parayavistovisidann idam abravit
SYNONYMS
tan--all of them; samiksya--after seeing; sah--he; kaunteyah--the son
of Kunti; sarvan--all kinds of; bandhun--relatives; avasthitan--situated; krpaya--by compassion; paraya--of a high grade; avistah--overwhelmed by; visidan--while lamenting; idam--thus; abravit--spoke.
TRANSLATIONWhen the son of Kunti, Arjuna, saw all these different grades of
friends and relatives, he became overwhelmed with compassion and spokethus:
TEXT 28
arjuna uvaca
drstvemam sva-janam krsnayuyutsum samupasthitamsidanti mama gatranimukham ca parisusyati
SYNONYMSarjunah--Arjuna; uvaca--said; drstva--after seeing; imam--all these;
sva-janam--kinsmen; krsna--O Krsna; yuyutsum--all in fighting spirit;samupasthitam--all present; sidanti--quivering; mama--my; gatrani--limbs of the body; mukham--mouth; ca--also; parisusyati--drying up.
TRANSLATIONArjuna said: My dear Krsna, seeing my friends and relatives present
before me in such a fighting spirit, I feel the limbs of my bodyquivering and my mouth drying up.
PURPORTAny man who has genuine devotion to the Lord has all the good qualities
which are found in godly persons or in the demigods, whereas thenondevotee, however advanced he may be in material qualifications byeducation and culture, lacks in godly qualities. As such, Arjuna, justafter seeing his kinsmen, friends and relatives on the battlefield, wasat once overwhelmed by compassion for them who had so decided to fightamongst themselves. As far as his soldiers were concerned, he wassympathetic from the beginning, but he felt compassion even for thesoldiers of the opposite party, foreseeing their imminent death. And sothinking, the limbs of his body began to quiver, and his mouth becamedry. He was more or less astonished to see their fighting spirit.Practically the whole community, all blood relatives of Arjuna, hadcome to fight with him. This overwhelmed a kind devotee like Arjuna.Although it is not mentioned here, still one can easily imagine thatnot only were Arjuna's bodily limbs quivering and his mouth drying up,but that he was also crying out of compassion. Such symptoms in Arjunawere not due to weakness but to his softheartedness, a characteristicof a pure devotee of the Lord. It is said therefore:
yasyasti bhaktir bhagavaty akincana
sarvair gunais tatra samasate surahharav abhaktasya kuto mahad-gunamano-rathenasati dhavato bahih
"One who has unflinching devotion for the Personality of Godhead has
all the good qualities of the demigods. But one who is not a devotee ofthe Lord has only material qualifications that are of little value.This is because he is hovering on the mental plane and is certain to beattracted by the glaring material energy." (Bhag. 5.18.12)
TEXT 29
vepathus ca sarire me
roma-harsas ca jayategandivam sramsate hastattvak caiva paridahyate
SYNONYMSvepathuh--trembling of the body; ca--also; sarire--on the body; me--my;
roma-harsah--standing of the hair on end; ca--also; jayate--is takingplace; gandivam--the bow of Arjuna; sramsate--is slipping; hastat--fromthe hands; tvak--skin; ca--also; eva--certainly; paridahyate--burning.
TRANSLATIONMy whole body is trembling, and my hair is standing on end. My bow
Gandiva is slipping from my hand, and my skin is burning.
PURPORTThere are two kinds of trembling of the body, and two kinds of
standings of the hair on end. Such phenomena occur either in greatspiritual ecstasy or out of great fear under material conditions. Thereis no fear in transcendental realization. Arjuna's symptoms in thissituation are out of material fear--namely, loss of life. This isevident from other symptoms also; he became so impatient that hisfamous bow Gandiva was slipping from his hands, and, because his heartwas burning within him, he was feeling a burning sensation of the skin.All these are due to a material conception of life.
TEXT 30
na ca saknomy avasthatum
bhramativa ca me manahnimittani ca pasyamiviparitani kesava
SYNONYMSna--nor; ca--also; saknomi--am I able; avasthatum--to stay; bhramati--
forgetting; iva--as; ca--and; me--my; manah--mind; nimittani--causes;ca--also; pasyami--I foresee; viparitani--just the opposite; kesava--Okiller of the demon Kesi (Krsna).
TRANSLATIONI am now unable to stand here any longer. I am forgetting myself, and
my mind is reeling. I foresee only evil, O killer of the Kesi demon.
PURPORT
Due to his impatience, Arjuna was unable to stay on the battlefield,
and he was forgetting himself on account of the weakness of his mind.Excessive attachment for material things puts a man in a bewilderingcondition of existence. Bhayam dvitiyabhinivesatah syat (Bhag.11.2.37): such fearfulness and loss of mental equilibrium take place inpersons who are too affected by material conditions. Arjuna envisionedonly unhappiness in the battlefield--he would not be happy even bygaining victory over the foe. The word nimitta is significant. When aman sees only frustration in his expectations, he thinks, "Why am Ihere?" Everyone is interested in himself and his own welfare. No one isinterested in the Supreme Self. Arjuna is supposed to show disregardfor self-interest by submission to the will of Krsna, who is everyone'sreal self-interest. The conditioned soul forgets this, and thereforesuffers material pains. Arjuna thought that his victory in the battlewould only be a cause of lamentation for him.
TEXT 31
na ca sreyo 'nupasyami
hatva sva-janam ahavena kankse vijayam krsnana ca rajyam sukhani ca
SYNONYMSna--nor; ca--also; sreyah--good; anupasyami--do I foresee; hatva--by
killing; sva-janam--own kinsmen; ahave--in the fight; na--nor; kankse--do I desire; vijayam--victory; krsna--O Krsna; na--nor; ca--also;rajyam--kingdom; sukhani--happiness thereof; ca--also.
TRANSLATIONI do not see how any good can come from killing my own kinsmen in this
battle, nor can I, my dear Krsna, desire any subsequent victory,kingdom, or happiness.
PURPORTWithout knowing that one's self-interest is in Visnu (or Krsna),
conditioned souls are attracted by bodily relationships, hoping to behappy in such situations. Under delusion, they forget that Krsna isalso the cause of material happiness. Arjuna appears to have evenforgotten the moral codes for a ksatriya. It is said that two kinds ofmen, namely the ksatriya who dies directly in front of the battlefieldunder Krsna's personal orders and the person in the renounced order oflife who is absolutely devoted to spiritual culture, are eligible toenter into the sun globe, which is so powerful and dazzling. Arjuna isreluctant even to kill his enemies, let alone his relatives. He thoughtthat by killing his kinsmen there would be no happiness in his life,and therefore he was not willing to fight, just as a person who doesnot feel hunger is not inclined to cook. He has now decided to go intothe forest and live a secluded life in frustration. But as a ksatriya,he requires a kingdom for his subsistence, because the ksatriyas cannotengage themselves in any other occupation. But Arjuna has no kingdom.Arjuna's sole opportunity for gaining a kingdom lay in fighting withhis cousins and brothers and reclaiming the kingdom inherited from hisfather, which he does not like to do. Therefore he considers himselffit to go to the forest to live a secluded life of frustration.
TEXTS 32-35
kim no rajyena govinda
kim bhogair jivitena vayesam arthe kanksitam norajyam bhogah sukhani ca
ta ime 'vasthita yuddhe
pranams tyaktva dhanani caacaryah pitarah putrastathaiva ca pitamahah
matulah svasurah pautrah
syalah sambandhinas tathaetan na hantum icchamighnato 'pi madhusudana
api trailokya-rajyasya
hetoh kim nu mahi-krtenihatya dhartarastran nahka pritih syaj janardana
SYNONYMSkim--what use; nah--to us; rajyena--is the kingdom; govinda--O Krsna;
kim--what; bhogaih--enjoyment; jivitena--by living; va--either; yesam--for whom; arthe--for the matter of; kanksitam--desired; nah--our;rajyam--kingdom; bhogah--material enjoyment; sukhani--all happiness;ca--also; te--all of them; ime--these; avasthitah--situated; yuddhe--inthis battlefield; pranan--lives; tyaktva--giving up; dhanani--riches;ca--also; acaryah--teachers; pitarah--fathers; putrah--sons; tatha--aswell as; eva--certainly; ca--also; pitamahah--grandfathers; matulah--maternal uncles; svasurah--fathers-in-law; pautrah--grandsons; syalah--brothers-in-law; sambandhinah--relatives; tatha--as well as; etan--allthese; na--never; hantum--for killing; icchami--do I wish; ghnatah--being killed; api--even; madhusudana--O killer of the demon Madhu(Krsna); api--even if; trai-lokya--of the three worlds; rajyasya--ofthe kingdoms; hetoh--in exchange; kim--what to speak of; nu--only;mahi-krte--for the sake of the earth; nihatya--by killing;dhartarastran--the sons of Dhrtarastra; nah--our; ka--what; pritih--pleasure; syat--will there be; janardana--O maintainer of all livingentities.
TRANSLATIONO Govinda, of what avail to us are kingdoms, happiness or even life
itself when all those for whom we may desire them are now arrayed inthis battlefield? O Madhusudana, when teachers, fathers, sons,grandfathers, maternal uncles, fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law and all relatives are ready to give up their lives and propertiesand are standing before me, then why should I wish to kill them, thoughI may survive? O maintainer of all creatures, I am not prepared tofight with them even in exchange for the three worlds, let alone thisearth.
PURPORT
Arjuna has addressed Lord Krsna as Govinda because Krsna is the object
of all pleasures for cows and the senses. By using this significantword, Arjuna indicates what will satisfy his senses. Although Govindais not meant for satisfying our senses, if we try to satisfy the sensesof Govinda then automatically our own senses are satisfied. Materially,everyone wants to satisfy his senses, and he wants God to be the ordersupplier for such satisfaction. The Lord will satisfy the senses of theliving entities as much as they deserve, but not to the extent thatthey may covet. But when one takes the opposite way--namely, when onetries to satisfy the senses of Govinda without desiring to satisfyone's own senses--then by the grace of Govinda all desires of theliving entity are satisfied. Arjuna's deep affection for community andfamily members is exhibited here partly due to his natural compassionfor them. He is therefore not prepared to fight. Everyone wants to showhis opulence to friends and relatives, but Arjuna fears that all hisrelatives and friends will be killed in the battlefield, and he will beunable to share his opulence after victory. This is a typicalcalculation of material life. The transcendental life is, however,different. Since a devotee wants to satisfy the desires of the Lord, hecan, Lord willing, accept all kinds of opulence for the service of theLord, and if the Lord is not willing, he should not accept a farthing.Arjuna did not want to kill his relatives, and if there were any needto kill them, he desired that Krsna kill them personally. At this pointhe did not know that Krsna had already killed them before their cominginto the battlefield and that he was only to become an instrument forKrsna. This fact is disclosed in the following chapters. As a naturaldevotee of the Lord, Arjuna did not like to retaliate against hismiscreant cousins and brothers, but it was the Lord's plan that theyshould all be killed. The devotee of the Lord does not retaliateagainst the wrongdoer, but the Lord does not tolerate any mischief doneto the devotee by the miscreants. The Lord can excuse a person on Hisown account, but He excuses no one who has done harm to His devotees.Therefore the Lord was determined to kill the miscreants, althoughArjuna wanted to excuse them.
TEXT 36
papam evasrayed asman
hatvaitan atatayinahtasman narha vayam hantumdhartarastran sa-bandhavansva-janam hi katham hatvasukhinah syama madhava
SYNONYMSpapam--vices; eva--certainly; asrayet--must take upon; asman--us;
hatva--by killing; etan--all these; atatayinah--aggressors; tasmat--therefore; na--never; arhah--deserving; vayam--we; hantum--to kill;dhartarastran--the sons of Dhrtarastra; sa-bandhavan--along withfriends; sva-janam--kinsmen; hi--certainly; katham--how; hatva--bykilling; sukhinah--happy; syama--become; madhava--O Krsna, husband ofthe goddess of fortune.
TRANSLATIONSin will overcome us if we slay such aggressors. Therefore it is not
proper for us to kill the sons of Dhrtarastra and our friends. What
should we gain, O Krsna, husband of the goddess of fortune, and how
could we be happy by killing our own kinsmen?
PURPORTAccording to Vedic injunctions there are six kinds of aggressors: 1) a
poison giver, 2) one who sets fire to the house, 3) one who attackswith deadly weapons, 4) one who plunders riches, 5) one who occupiesanother's land, and 6) one who kidnaps a wife. Such aggressors are atonce to be killed, and no sin is incurred by killing such aggressors.Such killing of aggressors is quite befitting any ordinary man, butArjuna was not an ordinary person. He was saintly by character, andtherefore he wanted to deal with them in saintliness. This kind ofsaintliness, however, is not for a ksatriya. Although a responsible manin the administration of a state is required to be saintly, he shouldnot be cowardly. For example, Lord Rama was so saintly that people wereanxious to live in His kingdom (rama-rajya), but Lord Rama never showedany cowardice. Ravana was an aggressor against Rama because Hekidnapped Rama's wife, Sita, but Lord Rama gave him sufficient lessons,unparalleled in the history of the world. In Arjuna's case, however,one should consider the special type of aggressors, namely his owngrandfather, own teacher, friends, sons, grandsons, etc. Because ofthem, Arjuna thought that he should not take the severe steps necessaryagainst ordinary aggressors. Besides that, saintly persons are advisedto forgive. Such injunctions for saintly persons are more importantthan any political emergency. Arjuna considered that rather than killhis own kinsmen for political reasons, it would be better to forgivethem on grounds of religion and saintly behavior. He did not,therefore, consider such killing profitable simply for the matter oftemporary bodily happiness. After all, kingdoms and pleasures derivedtherefrom are not permanent, so why should he risk his life and eternalsalvation by killing his own kinsmen? Arjuna's addressing of Krsna as"Madhava," or the husband of the goddess of fortune, is alsosignificant in this connection. He wanted to point out to Krsna that,as husband of the goddess of fortune, He should not induce Arjuna totake up a matter which would ultimately bring about misfortune. Krsna,however, never brings misfortune to anyone, to say nothing of Hisdevotees.
TEXTS 37-38
yady apy ete na pasyanti
lobhopahata-cetasahkula-ksaya-krtam dosammitra-drohe ca patakam
katham na jneyam asmabhih
papad asman nivartitumkula-ksaya-krtam dosamprapasyadbhir janardana
SYNONYMSyadi--if; api--certainly; ete--they; na--do not; pasyanti--see; lobha--
greed; upahata--overpowered; cetasah--the hearts; kula-ksaya--inkilling the family; krtam--done; dosam--fault; mitra-drohe--quarrelingwith friends; ca--also; patakam--sinful reactions; katham--why; na--shall not; jneyam--know this; asmabhih--by us; papat--from sins; asmat-
-ourselves; nivartitum--to cease; kula-ksaya--the destruction of a
dynasty; krtam--by so doing; dosam--crime; prapasyadbhih--by those whocan see; janardana--O Krsna.
TRANSLATIONO Janardana, although these men, overtaken by greed, see no fault in
killing one's family or quarreling with friends, why should we, withknowledge of the sin, engage in these acts?
PURPORTA ksatriya is not supposed to refuse to battle or gamble when he is so
invited by some rival party. Under such obligation, Arjuna could notrefuse to fight because he was challenged by the party of Duryodhana.In this connection, Arjuna considered that the other party might beblind to the effects of such a challenge. Arjuna, however, could seethe evil consequences and could not accept the challenge. Obligation isactually binding when the effect is good, but when the effect isotherwise, then no one can be bound. Considering all these pros andcons, Arjuna decided not to fight.
TEXT 39
kula-ksaye pranasyanti
kula-dharmah sanatanahdharme naste kulam krtsnamadharmo 'bhibhavaty uta
SYNONYMSkula-ksaye--in destroying the family; pranasyanti--becomes vanquished;
kula-dharmah--the family traditions; sanatanah--eternal; dharme--inreligion; naste--being destroyed; kulam--family; krtsnam--wholesale;adharmah--irreligious; abhibhavati--transforms; uta--it is said.
TRANSLATIONWith the destruction of dynasty, the eternal family tradition is
vanquished, and thus the rest of the family becomes involved inirreligious practice.
PURPORTIn the system of the varnasrama institution there are many principles
of religious traditions to help members of the family grow properly andattain spiritual values. The elder members are responsible for suchpurifying processes in the family, beginning from birth to death. Buton the death of the elder members, such family traditions ofpurification may stop, and the remaining younger family members maydevelop irreligious habits and thereby lose their chance for spiritualsalvation. Therefore, for no purpose should the elder members of thefamily be slain.
TEXT 40
adharmabhibhavat krsna
pradusyanti kula-striyah
strisu dustasu varsneya
jayate varna-sankarah
SYNONYMSadharma--irreligion; abhibhavat--having become predominant; krsna--O
Krsna; pradusyanti--become polluted; kula-striyah--family ladies;strisu--of the womanhood; dustasu--being so polluted; varsneya--Odescendant of Vrsni; jayate--it so becomes; varna-sankarah--unwantedprogeny.
TRANSLATIONWhen irreligion is prominent in the family, O Krsna, the women of the
family become corrupt, and from the degradation of womanhood, Odescendant of Vrsni, comes unwanted progeny.
PURPORTGood population in human society is the basic principle for peace,
prosperity and spiritual progress in life. The varnasrama religion'sprinciples were so designed that the good population would prevail insociety for the general spiritual progress of state and community. Suchpopulation depends on the chastity and faithfulness of its womanhood.As children are very prone to be misled, women are similarly very proneto degradation. Therefore, both children and women require protectionby the elder members of the family. By being engaged in variousreligious practices, women will not be misled into adultery. Accordingto Canakya Pandita, women are generally not very intelligent andtherefore not trustworthy. So, the different family traditions ofreligious activities should always engage them, and thus their chastityand devotion will give birth to a good population eligible forparticipating in the varnasrama system. On the failure of suchvarnasrama-dharma, naturally the women become free to act and mix withmen, and thus adultery is indulged in at the risk of unwantedpopulation. Irresponsible men also provoke adultery in society, andthus unwanted children flood the human race at the risk of war andpestilence.
TEXT 41
sankaro narakayaiva
kula-ghnanam kulasya capatanti pitaro hy esamlupta-pindodaka-kriyah
SYNONYMSsankarah--such unwanted children; narakaya--for hellish life; eva--
certainly; kula-ghnanam--of those who are killers of the family;kulasya--of the family; ca--also; patanti--fall down; pitarah--forefathers; hi--certainly; esam--of them; lupta--stopped; pinda--offerings; udaka--water; kriyah--performances.
TRANSLATIONWhen there is increase of unwanted population, a hellish situation is
created both for the family and for those who destroy the family
tradition. In such corrupt families, there is no offering of oblations
of food and water to the ancestors.
PURPORTAccording to the rules and regulations of fruitive activities, there is
a need to offer periodical food and water to the forefathers of thefamily. This offering is performed by worship of Visnu, because eatingthe remnants of food offered to Visnu can deliver one from all kinds ofsinful actions. Sometimes the forefathers may be suffering from varioustypes of sinful reactions, and sometimes some of them cannot evenacquire a gross material body and are forced to remain in subtle bodiesas ghosts. Thus, when remnants of prasadam food are offered toforefathers by descendants, the forefathers are released from ghostlyor other kinds of miserable life. Such help rendered to forefathers isa family tradition, and those who are not in devotional life arerequired to perform such rituals. One who is engaged in the devotionallife is not required to perform such actions. Simply by performingdevotional service, one can deliver hundreds and thousands offorefathers from all kinds of misery. It is stated in the Bhagavatam(11.5.41):
devarsi-bhutapta-nrnam pitrnam
na kinkaro nayam rni ca rajansarvatmana yah saranam saranyamgato mukundam parihrtya kartam
"Anyone who has taken shelter of the lotus feet of Mukunda, the giver
of liberation, giving up all kinds of obligation, and has taken to thepath in all seriousness, owes neither duties nor obligations to thedemigods, sages, general living entities, family members, humankind orforefathers." Such obligations are automatically fulfilled byperformance of devotional service to the Supreme Personality ofGodhead.
TEXT 42
dosair etaih kula-ghnanam
varna-sankara-karakaihutsadyante jati-dharmahkula-dharmas ca sasvatah
SYNONYMSdosaih--by such faults; etaih--all these; kula-ghnanam--of the
destroyer of the family; varna-sankara--unwanted children; karakaih--bythe doers; utsadyante--causes devastation; jati-dharmah--communityprojects; kula-dharmah--family traditions; ca--also; sasvatah--eternal.
TRANSLATIONDue to the evil deeds of the destroyers of family tradition, all kinds
of community projects and family welfare activities are devastated.
PURPORTThe four orders of human society, combined with family welfare
activities as they are set forth by the institution of the sanatana-
dharma or varnasrama-dharma, are designed to enable the human being to
attain his ultimate salvation. Therefore, the breaking of the sanatana-dharma tradition by irresponsible leaders of society brings about chaosin that society, and consequently people forget the aim of life--Visnu.Such leaders are called blind, and persons who follow such leaders aresure to be led into chaos.
TEXT 43
utsanna-kula-dharmanam
manusyanam janardananarake niyatam vasobhavatity anususruma
SYNONYMSutsanna--spoiled; kula-dharmanam--of those who have the family
traditions; manusyanam--of such men; janardana--O Krsna; narake--inhell; niyatam--always; vasah--residence; bhavati--it so becomes; iti--thus; anususruma--I have heard by disciplic succession.
TRANSLATIONO Krsna, maintainer of the people, I have heard by disciplic succession
that those who destroy family traditions dwell always in hell.
PURPORTArjuna bases his argument not on his own personal experience, but on
what he has heard from the authorities. That is the way of receivingreal knowledge. One cannot reach the real point of factual knowledgewithout being helped by the right person who is already established inthat knowledge. There is a system in the varnasrama institution bywhich one has to undergo the process of atonement before death for hissinful activities. One who is always engaged in sinful activities mustutilize the process of atonement called the prayascitta. Without doingso, one surely will be transferred to hellish planets to undergomiserable lives as the result of sinful activities.
TEXT 44
aho bata mahat papam
kartum vyavasita vayamyad rajya-sukha-lobhenahantum sva-janam udyatah
SYNONYMSaho--alas; bata--how strange it is; mahat--great; papam--sins; kartum--
to perform; vyavasitah--decided; vayam--we; yat--so that; rajya--kingdom; sukha-lobhena--driven by greed for royal happiness; hantum--tokill; sva-janam--kinsmen; udyatah--trying for.
TRANSLATIONAlas, how strange it is that we are preparing to commit greatly sinful
acts, driven by the desire to enjoy royal happiness.
PURPORT
Driven by selfish motives, one may be inclined to such sinful acts as
the killing of one's own brother, father or mother. There are many suchinstances in the history of the world. But Arjuna, being a saintlydevotee of the Lord, is always conscious of moral principles andtherefore takes care to avoid such activities.
TEXT 45
yadi mam apratikaram
asastram sastra-panayahdhartarastra rane hanyustan me ksemataram bhavet
SYNONYMSyadi--even if; mam--unto me; apratikaram--without being resistant;
asastram--without being fully equipped; sastra-panayah--those withweapons in hand; dhartarastrah--the sons of Dhrtarastra; rane--in thebattlefield; hanyuh--may kill; tat--that; me--mine; ksema-taram--better; bhavet--become.
TRANSLATIONI would consider it better for the sons of Dhrtarastra to kill me
unarmed and unresisting, rather than to fight with them.
PURPORTIt is the custom--according to ksatriya fighting principles--that an
unarmed and unwilling foe should not be attacked. Arjuna, however, insuch an enigmatic position, decided he would not fight if he wereattacked by the enemy. He did not consider how much the other party wasbent upon fighting. All these symptoms are due to soft-heartednessresulting from his being a great devotee of the Lord.
TEXT 46
sanjaya uvaca
evam uktvarjunah sankhyerathopastha upavisatvisrjya sa-saram capamsoka-samvigna-manasah
SYNONYMSsanjayah--Sanjaya; uvaca--said; evam--thus; uktva--saying; arjunah--
Arjuna; sankhye--in the battlefield; ratha--chariot; upasthe--situatedon; upavisat--sat down again; visrjya--keeping aside; sa-saram--alongwith arrows; capam--the bow; soka--by lamentation; samvigna--distressed; manasah--within the mind.
TRANSLATIONSanjaya said: Arjuna, having thus spoken on the battlefield, cast aside
his bow and arrows and sat down on the chariot, his mind overwhelmedwith grief.
PURPORT
While observing the situation of his enemy, Arjuna stood up on the
chariot, but he was so afflicted with lamentation that he sat downagain, setting aside his bow and arrows. Such a kind and soft-heartedperson, in the devotional service of the Lord, is fit to receive self-knowledge.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the First Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Observing the Armies on the Battlefieldof Kuruksetra.
Chapter 2
Contents of the Gita Summarized
TEXT 1
sanjaya uvaca
tam tatha krpayavistamasru-purnakuleksanamvisidantam idam vakyamuvaca madhusudanah
SYNONYMSsanjayah uvaca--Sanjaya said; tam--unto Arjuna; tatha--thus; krpaya--by
compassion; avistam--overwhelmed; asru-purna--full of tears; akula--depressed; iksanam--eyes; visidantam--lamenting; idam--this; vakyam--words; uvaca--said; madhu-sudanah--the killer of Madhu.
TRANSLATIONSanjaya said: Seeing Arjuna full of compassion and very sorrowful, his
eyes brimming with tears, Madhusudana, Krsna, spoke the followingwords.
PURPORTMaterial compassion, lamentation and tears are all signs of ignorance
of the real self. Compassion for the eternal soul is self-realization.The word "Madhusudana" is significant in this verse. Lord Krsna killedthe demon Madhu, and now Arjuna wanted Krsna to kill the demon ofmisunderstanding that had overtaken him in the discharge of his duty.No one knows where compassion should be applied. Compassion for thedress of a drowning man is senseless. A man fallen in the ocean ofnescience cannot be saved simply by rescuing his outward dress--thegross material body. One who does not know this and laments for theoutward dress is called a sudra, or one who laments unnecessarily.Arjuna was a ksatriya, and this conduct was not expected from him. LordKrsna, however, can dissipate the lamentation of the ignorant man, andfor this purpose the Bhagavad-gita was sung by Him. This chapterinstructs us in self-realization by an analytical study of the materialbody and the spirit soul, as explained by the supreme authority, LordSri Krsna. This realization is made possible by working with thefruitive being situated in the fixed conception of the real self.
TEXT 2
sri-bhagavan uvaca
kutas tva kasmalam idamvisame samupasthitamanarya-justam asvargyamakirti-karam arjuna
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; kutah--
wherefrom; tva--unto you; kasmalam--dirtiness; idam--this lamentation;visame--in this hour of crisis; samupasthitam--arrived; anarya--personswho do not know the value of life; justam--practiced by; asvargyam--that which does not lead to higher planets; akirti--infamy; karam--thecause of; arjuna--O Arjuna.
TRANSLATIONThe Supreme Person [Bhagavan] said: My dear Arjuna, how have these
impurities come upon you? They are not at all befitting a man who knowsthe progressive values of life. They lead not to higher planets, but toinfamy.
PURPORTKrsna and the Supreme Personality of Godhead are identical. Therefore
Lord Krsna is referred to as "Bhagavan" throughout the Gita. Bhagavanis the ultimate in Absolute Truth. Absolute Truth is realized in threephases of understanding, namely Brahman, or the impersonal all-pervasive spirit; Paramatma, or the localized aspect of the Supremewithin the heart of all living entities; and Bhagavan, or the SupremePersonality of Godhead, Lord Krsna. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.11)this conception of the Absolute Truth is explained thus:
vadanti tat tattva-vidas
tattvam yaj jnanam advayambrahmeti paramatmetibhagavan iti sabdyate
"The Absolute Truth is realized in three phases of understanding by the
knower of the Absolute Truth, and all of them are identical. Suchphases of the Absolute Truth are expressed as Brahman, Paramatma, andBhagavan."These three divine aspects can be explained by the example of the sun,which also has three different aspects, namely the sunshine, the sun'ssurface and the sun planet itself. One who studies the sunshine only isthe preliminary student. One who understands the sun's surface isfurther advanced. And one who can enter into the sun planet is thehighest. Ordinary students who are satisfied simply by understandingthe sunshine--its universal pervasiveness and the glaring effulgence ofits impersonal nature--may be compared to those who can realize onlythe Brahman feature of the Absolute Truth. The student who has advancedstill further can know the sun disc, which is compared to knowledge ofthe Paramatma feature of the Absolute Truth. And the student who canenter into the heart of the sun planet is compared to those who realizethe personal features of the Supreme Absolute Truth. Therefore, thebhaktas, or the transcendentalists who have realized the Bhagavanfeature of the Absolute Truth, are the topmost transcendentalists,
although all students who are engaged in the study of the Absolute
Truth are engaged in the same subject matter. The sunshine, the sundisc and the inner affairs of the sun planet cannot be separated fromone another, and yet the students of the three different phases are notin the same category.The Sanskrit word bhagavan is explained by the great authority,Parasara Muni, the father of Vyasadeva. The Supreme Personality whopossesses all riches, all strength, all fame, all beauty, all knowledgeand all renunciation is called Bhagavan. There are many persons who arevery rich, very powerful, very beautiful, very famous, very learned,and very much detached, but no one can claim that he possesses allriches, all strength, etc., entirely. Only Krsna can claim this becauseHe is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. No living entity, includingBrahma, Lord Siva, or Narayana, can possess opulences as fully asKrsna. Therefore it is concluded in the Brahma-samhita by Lord Brahmahimself that Lord Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. No oneis equal to or above Him. He is the primeval Lord, or Bhagavan, knownas Govinda, and He is the supreme cause of all causes:
isvarah paramah krsnah
sac-cid-ananda-vigrahahanadir adir govindahsarva-karana-karanam
"There are many personalities possessing the qualities of Bhagavan, but
Krsna is the supreme because none can excel Him. He is the SupremePerson, and His body is eternal, full of knowledge and bliss. He is theprimeval Lord Govinda and the cause of all causes." (Brahma-samhita5.1)In the Bhagavatam also there is a list of many incarnations of theSupreme Personality of Godhead, but Krsna is described as the originalPersonality of Godhead, from whom many, many incarnations andPersonalities of Godhead expand:
ete camsa-kalah pumsah
krsnas tu bhagavan svayamindrari-vyakulam lokammrdayanti yuge yuge
"All the lists of the incarnations of Godhead submitted herewith are
either plenary expansions or parts of the plenary expansions of theSupreme Godhead, but Krsna is the Supreme Personality of GodheadHimself." (Bhag. 1.3.28)Therefore, Krsna is the original Supreme Personality of Godhead, theAbsolute Truth, the source of both the Supersoul and the impersonalBrahman.In the presence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Arjuna'slamentation for his kinsmen is certainly unbecoming, and thereforeKrsna expressed His surprise with the word kutas, "wherefrom." Suchunmanly sentiments were never expected from a person belonging to thecivilized class of men known as Aryans. The word Aryan is applicable topersons who know the value of life and have a civilization based onspiritual realization. Persons who are led by the material conceptionof life do not know that the aim of life is realization of the AbsoluteTruth, Visnu, or Bhagavan, and they are captivated by the externalfeatures of the material world, and therefore they do not know whatliberation is. Persons who have no knowledge of liberation frommaterial bondage are called non-Aryans. Although Arjuna was a ksatriya,
he was deviating from his prescribed duties by declining to fight. This
act of cowardice is described as befitting the non-Aryans. Suchdeviation from duty does not help one in the progress of spirituallife, nor does it even give one the opportunity to become famous inthis world. Lord Krsna did not approve of the so-called compassion ofArjuna for his kinsmen.
TEXT 3
klaibyam ma sma gamah partha
naitat tvayy upapadyateksudram hrdaya-daurbalyamtyaktvottistha parantapa
SYNONYMSklaibyam--impotence; ma--do not; sma--take it; gamah--go in; partha--O
son of Prtha; na--never; etat--like this; tvayi--unto you; upadyate--isbefitting; ksudram--very little; hrdaya--heart; daurbalyam--weakness;tyaktva--giving up; uttistha--get up; param-tapa--O chastiser of theenemies.
TRANSLATIONO son of Prtha, do not yield to this degrading impotence. It does not
become you. Give up such petty weakness of heart and arise, O chastiserof the enemy.
PURPORTArjuna was addressed as "the son of Prtha," who happened to be the
sister of Krsna's father Vasudeva. Therefore Arjuna had a bloodrelationship with Krsna. If the son of a ksatriya declines to fight, heis a ksatriya in name only, and if the son of a brahmana actsimpiously, he is a brahmana in name only. Such ksatriyas and brahmanasare unworthy sons of their fathers; therefore, Krsna did not wantArjuna to become an unworthy son of a ksatriya. Arjuna was the mostintimate friend of Krsna, and Krsna was directly guiding him on thechariot; but in spite of all these credits, if Arjuna abandoned thebattle, he would be committing an infamous act; therefore Krsna saidthat such an attitude in Arjuna did not fit his personality. Arjunamight argue that he would give up the battle on the grounds of hismagnanimous attitude for the most respectable Bhisma and his relatives,but Krsna considered that sort of magnanimity not approved byauthority. Therefore, such magnanimity or so-called nonviolence shouldbe given up by persons like Arjuna under the direct guidance of Krsna.
TEXT 4
arjuna uvaca
katham bhismam aham sankhyedronam ca madhusudanaisubhih pratiyotsyamipujarhav ari-sudana
SYNONYMS
arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; katham--how; bhismam--unto Bhisma; aham--I;
sankhye--in the fight; dronam--unto Drona; ca--also; madhu-sudana--Okiller of Madhu; isubhih--with arrows; pratiyotsyami--shallcounterattack; puja-arhau--those who are worshipable; ari-sudana--Okiller of the enemies.
TRANSLATIONArjuna said: O killer of Madhu [Krsna], how can I counterattack with
arrows in battle men like Bhisma and Drona, who are worthy of myworship?
PURPORTRespectable superiors like Bhisma the grandfather and Dronacarya the
teacher are always worshipable. Even if they attack, they should not becounterattacked. It is general etiquette that superiors are not to beoffered even a verbal fight. Even if they are sometimes harsh inbehavior, they should not be harshly treated. Then, how is it possiblefor Arjuna to counterattack them? Would Krsna ever attack His owngrandfather, Ugrasena, or His teacher, Sandipani Muni? These were someof the arguments by Arjuna to Krsna.
TEXT 5
gurun ahatva hi mahanubhavan
sreyo bhoktum bhaiksyam apiha lokehatvartha-kamams tu gurun ihaivabhunjiya bhogan rudhira-pradigdhan
SYNONYMSgurun--the superiors; ahatva--not killing; hi--certainly; maha-
anubhavan--great souls; sreyah--it is better; bhoktum--to enjoy life;bhaiksyam--begging; api--even; iha--in this life; loke--in this world;hatva--killing; artha--gain; kaman--so desiring; tu--but; gurun--superiors; iha--in this world; eva--certainly; bhunjiya--has to enjoy;bhogan--enjoyable things; rudhira--blood; pradigdhan--tainted with.
TRANSLATIONIt is better to live in this world by begging than to live at the cost
of the lives of great souls who are my teachers. Even though they areavaricious, they are nonetheless superiors. If they are killed, ourspoils will be tainted with blood.
PURPORTAccording to scriptural codes, a teacher who engages in an abominable
action and has lost his sense of discrimination is fit to be abandoned.Bhisma and Drona were obliged to take the side of Duryodhana because ofhis financial assistance, although they should not have accepted such aposition simply on financial considerations. Under the circumstances,they have lost the respectability of teachers. But Arjuna thinks thatnevertheless they remain his superiors, and therefore to enjoy materialprofits after killing them would mean to enjoy spoils tainted withblood.
TEXT 6
na caitad vidmah kataran no gariyo
yad va jayema yadi va no jayeyuhyan eva hatva na jijivisamaste 'vasthitah pramukhe dhartarastrah
SYNONYMSna--nor; ca--also; etat--this; vidmah--do know; katarat--which; nah--
us; gariyah--better; yat--what; va--either; jayema--conquer us; yadi--if; va--or; nah--us; jayeyuh--conquer; yan--those; eva--certainly;hatva--by killing; na--never; jijivisamah--want to live; te--all ofthem; avasthitah--are situated; pramukhe--in the front; dhartarastrah--the sons of Dhrtarastra.
TRANSLATIONNor do we know which is better--conquering them or being conquered by
them. The sons of Dhrtarastra, whom if we kill we should not care tolive, are now standing before us on this battlefield.
PURPORTArjuna did not know whether he should fight and risk unnecessary
violence, although fighting is the duty of the ksatriyas, or whether heshould refrain and live by begging. If he did not conquer the enemy,begging would be his only means of subsistence. Nor was there certaintyof victory, because either side might emerge victorious. Even ifvictory awaited them (and their cause was justified), still, if thesons of Dhrtarastra died in battle, it would be very difficult to livein their absence. Under the circumstances, that would be another kindof defeat for them. All these considerations by Arjuna definitelyproved that he was not only a great devotee of the Lord but he was alsohighly enlightened and had complete control over his mind and senses.His desire to live by begging, although he was born in the royalhousehold, is another sign of detachment. He was truly virtuous, asthese qualities, combined with his faith in the words of instruction ofSri Krsna (his spiritual master), indicate. It is concluded that Arjunawas quite fit for liberation. Unless the senses are controlled, thereis no chance of elevation to the platform of knowledge, and withoutknowledge and devotion there is no chance of liberation. Arjuna wascompetent in all these attributes, over and above his enormousattributes in his material relationships.
TEXT 7
karpanya-dosopahata-svabhavah
prcchami tvam dharma-sammudha-cetahyac chreyah syan niscitam bruhi tan mesisyas te 'ham sadhi mam tvam prapannam
SYNONYMSkarpanya--miserly; dosa--weakness; upahata--being inflicted by; sva-
bhavah--characteristics; prcchami--I am asking; tvam--unto You; dharma--religion; sammudha--bewildered; cetah--in heart; yat--what; sreyah--all-good; syat--may be; niscitam--confidently; bruhi--tell; tat--that;
me--unto me; sisyah--disciple; te--Your; aham--I am; sadhi--just
instruct; mam--me; tvam--unto You; prapannam--surrendered.
TRANSLATIONNow I am confused about my duty and have lost all composure because of
weakness. In this condition I am asking You to tell me clearly what isbest for me. Now I am Your disciple, and a soul surrendered unto You.Please instruct me.
PURPORTBy nature's own way the complete system of material activities is a
source of perplexity for everyone. In every step there is perplexity,and therefore it behooves one to approach a bona fide spiritual masterwho can give one proper guidance for executing the purpose of life. AllVedic literatures advise us to approach a bona fide spiritual master toget free from the perplexities of life which happen without our desire.They are like a forest fire that somehow blazes without being set byanyone. Similarly, the world situation is such that perplexities oflife automatically appear, without our wanting such confusion. No onewants fire, and yet it takes place, and we become perplexed. The Vedicwisdom therefore advises that in order to solve the perplexities oflife and to understand the science of the solution, one must approach aspiritual master who is in the disciplic succession. A person with abona fide spiritual master is supposed to know everything. One shouldnot, therefore, remain in material perplexities but should approach aspiritual master. This is the purport of this verse.Who is the man in material perplexities? It is he who does notunderstand the problems of life. In the Garga Upanisad the perplexedman is described as follows: yo va etad aksaram gargy aviditvasmallokat praiti sa krpanah. "He is a miserly man who does not solve theproblems of life as a human and who thus quits this world like the catsand dogs, without understanding the science of self-realization." Thishuman form of life is a most valuable asset for the living entity whocan utilize it for solving the problems of life; therefore, one whodoes not utilize this opportunity properly is a miser. On the otherhand, there is the brahmana, or he who is intelligent enough to utilizethis body to solve all the problems of life.The krpanas, or miserly persons, waste their time in being overlyaffectionate for family, society, country, etc., in the materialconception of life. One is often attached to family life, namely towife, children and other members, on the basis of "skin disease." Thekrpana thinks that he is able to protect his family members from death;or the krpana thinks that his family or society can save him from theverge of death. Such family attachment can be found even in the loweranimals who take care of children also. Being intelligent, Arjuna couldunderstand that his affection for family members and his wish toprotect them from death were the causes of his perplexities. Althoughhe could understand that his duty to fight was awaiting him, still, onaccount of miserly weakness, he could not discharge the duties. He istherefore asking Lord Krsna, the supreme spiritual master, to make adefinite solution. He offers himself to Krsna as a disciple. He wantsto stop friendly talks. Talks between the master and the disciple areserious, and now Arjuna wants to talk very seriously before therecognized spiritual master. Krsna is therefore the original spiritualmaster of the science of Bhagavad-gita, and Arjuna is the firstdisciple for understanding the Gita. How Arjuna understands the
Bhagavad-gita is stated in the Gita itself. And yet foolish mundane
scholars explain that one need not submit to Krsna as a person, but to"the unborn within Krsna." There is no difference between Krsna'swithin and without. And one who has no sense of this understanding isthe greatest fool in trying to understand Bhagavad-gita.
TEXT 8
na hi prapasyami mamapanudyad
yac chokam ucchosanam indriyanamavapya bhumav asapatnam rddhamrajyam suranam api cadhipatyam
SYNONYMSna--do not; hi--certainly; prapasyami--I see; mama--my; apanudyat--can
drive away; yat--that; sokam--lamentation; ucchosanam--drying up;indriyanam--of the senses; avapya--achieving; bhumau--on the earth;asapatnam--without rival; rddham--prosperous; rajyam--kingdom; suranam--of the demigods; api--even; ca--also; adhipatyam--supremacy.
TRANSLATIONI can find no means to drive away this grief which is drying up my
senses. I will not be able to destroy it even if I win an unrivaledkingdom on earth with sovereignty like the demigods in heaven.
PURPORTAlthough Arjuna was putting forward so many arguments based on
knowledge of the principles of religion and moral codes, it appearsthat he was unable to solve his real problem without the help of thespiritual master, Lord Sri Krsna. He could understand that his so-called knowledge was useless in driving away his problems, which weredrying up his whole existence; and it was impossible for him to solvesuch perplexities without the help of a spiritual master like LordKrsna. Academic knowledge, scholarship, high position, etc., are alluseless in solving the problems of life; help can only be given by aspiritual master like Krsna. Therefore, the conclusion is that aspiritual master who is one hundred percent Krsna conscious is the bonafide spiritual master, for he can solve the problems of life. LordCaitanya said that one who is master in the science of Krsnaconsciousness, regardless of his social position, is the real spiritualmaster.
kiba vipra, kiba nyasi, sudra kene naya
yei krsna-tattva-vetta, sei 'guru' haya
"It does not matter whether a person is a vipra [learned scholar in
Vedic wisdom] or is born in a lower family, or is in the renouncedorder of life--if he is master in the science of Krsna, he is theperfect and bona fide spiritual master." (Caitanya-caritamrta, Madhya8.128) So without being a master in the science of Krsna consciousness,no one is a bona fide spiritual master. It is also said in the Vedicliteratures:
sat-karma-nipuno vipro
mantra-tantra-visaradah
avaisnavo gurur na syad
vaisnavah sva-paco guruh
"A scholarly brahmana, expert in all subjects of Vedic knowledge, is
unfit to become a spiritual master without being a Vaisnava, or expertin the science of Krsna consciousness. But a person born in a family ofa lower caste can become a spiritual master if he is a Vaisnava, orKrsna conscious." (Padma Purana)The problems of material existence--birth, old age, disease and death--cannot be counteracted by accumulation of wealth and economicdevelopment. In many parts of the world there are states which arereplete with all facilities of life, which are full of wealth andeconomically developed, yet the problems of material existence arestill present. They are seeking peace in different ways, but they canachieve real happiness only if they consult Krsna, or the Bhagavad-gitaand Srimad-Bhagavatam--which constitute the science of Krsna--or thebona fide representative of Krsna, the man in Krsna consciousness.If economic development and material comforts could drive away one'slamentations for family, social, national or international inebrieties,then Arjuna would not have said that even an unrivaled kingdom on earthor supremacy like that of the demigods in the heavenly planets wouldnot be able to drive away his lamentations. He sought, therefore,refuge in Krsna consciousness, and that is the right path for peace andharmony. Economic development or supremacy over the world can befinished at any moment by the cataclysms of material nature. Evenelevation into a higher planetary situation, as men are now seeking aplace on the moon planet, can also be finished at one stroke. TheBhagavad-gita confirms this: ksine punye martya-lokam visanti. "Whenthe results of pious activities are finished, one falls down again fromthe peak of happiness to the lowest status of life." Many politiciansof the world have fallen down in that way. Such downfalls onlyconstitute more causes for lamentation.Therefore, if we want to curb lamentation for good, then we have totake shelter of Krsna, as Arjuna is seeking to do. So Arjuna askedKrsna to solve his problem definitely, and that is the way of Krsnaconsciousness.
TEXT 9
sanjaya uvaca
evam uktva hrsikesamgudakesah parantapahna yotsya iti govindamuktva tusnim babhuva ha
SYNONYMSsanjayah uvaca--Sanjaya said; evam--thus; uktva--speaking; hrsikesam--
unto Krsna, the master of the senses; gudakesah--Arjuna, the master atcurbing ignorance; parantapah--the chastiser of the enemies; na yotsye--I shall not fight; iti--thus; govindam--unto Krsna, the giver ofpleasure; uktva--saying; tusnim--silent; babhuva--became; ha--certainly.
TRANSLATIONSanjaya said: Having spoken thus, Arjuna, chastiser of enemies, told
Krsna, "Govinda, I shall not fight," and fell silent.
PURPORT
Dhrtarastra must have been very glad to understand that Arjuna was not
going to fight and was instead leaving the battlefield for the beggingprofession. But Sanjaya disappointed him again in relating that Arjunawas competent to kill his enemies (parantapah). Although Arjuna was,for the time being, overwhelmed with false grief due to familyaffection, he surrendered unto Krsna, the supreme spiritual master, asa disciple. This indicated that he would soon be free from the falselamentation resulting from family affection and would be enlightenedwith perfect knowledge of self-realization, or Krsna consciousness, andwould then surely fight. Thus Dhrtarastra's joy would be frustrated,since Arjuna would be enlightened by Krsna and would fight to the end.
TEXT 10
tam uvaca hrsikesah
prahasann iva bharatasenayor ubhayor madhyevisidantam, idam vacah
SYNONYMStam--unto him; uvaca--said; hrsikesah--the master of the senses, Krsna;
prahasan--smiling; iva--like that; bharata--O Dhrtarastra, descendantof Bharata; senayoh--of the armies; ubhayoh--of both parties; madhye--between; visidantam--unto the lamenting one; idam--the following;vacah--words.
TRANSLATIONO descendant of Bharata, at that time Krsna, smiling, in the midst of
both the armies, spoke the following words to the grief-strickenArjuna.
PURPORTThe talk was going on between intimate friends, namely the Hrsikesa and
the Gudakesa. As friends, both of them were on the same level, but oneof them voluntarily became a student of the other. Krsna was smilingbecause a friend had chosen to become a disciple. As Lord of all, He isalways in the superior position as the master of everyone, and yet theLord accepts one who wishes to be a friend, a son, a lover or adevotee, or who wants Him in such a role. But when He was accepted asthe master, He at once assumed the role and talked with the disciplelike the master--with gravity, as it is required. It appears that thetalk between the master and the disciple was openly exchanged in thepresence of both armies so that all were benefited. So the talks ofBhagavad-gita are not for any particular person, society, or community,but they are for all, and friends or enemies are equally entitled tohear them.
TEXT 11
sri-bhagavan uvaca
asocyan anvasocas tvamprajna-vadams ca bhasase
gatasun agatasums ca
nanusocanti panditah
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; asocyan--
that which is not worthy of lamentation; anvasocah--you are lamenting;tvam--you; prajna-vadan--learned talks; ca--also; bhasase--speaking;gata--lost; asun--life; agata--not past; asun--life; ca--also; na--never; anusocanti--lament; panditah--the learned.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: While speaking learned words, you are mourning
for what is not worthy of grief. Those who are wise lament neither forthe living nor the dead.
PURPORTThe Lord at once took the position of the teacher and chastised the
student, calling him, indirectly, a fool. The Lord said, "You aretalking like a learned man, but you do not know that one who islearned--one who knows what is body and what is soul--does not lamentfor any stage of the body, neither in the living nor in the deadcondition." As it will be explained in later chapters, it will be clearthat knowledge means to know matter and spirit and the controller ofboth. Arjuna argued that religious principles should be given moreimportance than politics or sociology, but he did not know thatknowledge of matter, soul and the Supreme is even more important thanreligious formularies. And, because he was lacking in that knowledge,he should not have posed himself as a very learned man. As he did nothappen to be a very learned man, he was consequently lamenting forsomething which was unworthy of lamentation. The body is born and isdestined to be vanquished today or tomorrow; therefore the body is notas important as the soul. One who knows this is actually learned, andfor him there is no cause for lamentation, regardless of the conditionof the material body.
TEXT 12
na tv evaham jatu nasam
na tvam neme janadhipahna caiva na bhavisyamahsarve vayam atah param
SYNONYMSna--never; tu--but; eva--certainly; aham--I; jatu--become; na--never;
asam--existed; na--it is not so; tvam--yourself; na--not; ime--allthese; jana-adhipah--kings; na--never; ca--also; eva--certainly; na--not like that; bhavisyamah--shall exist; sarve--all of us; vayam--we;atah param--hereafter.
TRANSLATIONNever was there a time when I did not exist, nor you, nor all these
kings; nor in the future shall any of us cease to be.
PURPORT
In the Vedas, in the Katha Upanisad as well as in the Svetasvatara
Upanisad, it is said that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is themaintainer of innumerable living entities, in terms of their differentsituations according to individual work and reaction of work. ThatSupreme Personality of Godhead is also, by His plenary portions, alivein the heart of every living entity. Only saintly persons who can see,within and without, the same Supreme Lord, can actually attain toperfect and eternal peace.
nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam
eko bahunam yo vidadhati kamantam atma-stham ye 'nupasyanti dhirastesam santih sasvati netaresam
The same Vedic truth given to Arjuna is given to all persons in the
world who pose themselves as very learned but factually have but a poorfund of knowledge. The Lord says clearly that He Himself, Arjuna, andall the kings who are assembled on the battlefield, are eternallyindividual beings and that the Lord is eternally the maintainer of theindividual living entities both in their conditioned as well as intheir liberated situations. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is thesupreme individual person, and Arjuna, the Lord's eternal associate,and all the kings assembled there are individual, eternal persons. Itis not that they did not exist as individuals in the past, and it isnot that they will not remain eternal persons. Their individualityexisted in the past, and their individuality will continue in thefuture without interruption. Therefore, there is no cause forlamentation for anyone.The Mayavadi theory that after liberation the individual soul,separated by the covering of maya or illusion, will merge into theimpersonal Brahman and lose its individual existence is not supportedherein by Lord Krsna, the supreme authority. Nor is the theory that weonly think of individuality in the conditioned state supported herein.Krsna clearly says herein that in the future also the individuality ofthe Lord and others, as it is confirmed in the Upanisads, will continueeternally. This statement of Krsna is authoritative because Krsnacannot be subject to illusion. If individuality is not a fact, thenKrsna would not have stressed it so much--even for the future. TheMayavadi may argue that the individuality spoken of by Krsna is notspiritual, but material. Even accepting the argument that theindividuality is material, then how can one distinguish Krsna'sindividuality? Krsna affirms His individuality in the past and confirmsHis individuality in the future also. He has confirmed Hisindividuality in many ways, and impersonal Brahman has been declared tobe subordinate to Him. Krsna has maintained spiritual individuality allalong; if He is accepted as an ordinary conditioned soul in individualconsciousness, then His Bhagavad-gita has no value as authoritativescripture. A common man with all the four defects of human frailty isunable to teach that which is worth hearing. The Gita is above suchliterature. No mundane book compares with the Bhagavad-gita. When oneaccepts Krsna as an ordinary man, the Gita loses all importance. TheMayavadi argues that the plurality mentioned in this verse isconventional and that it refers to the body. But previous to this versesuch a bodily conception is already condemned. After condemning thebodily conception of the living entities, how was it possible for Krsnato place a conventional proposition on the body again? Therefore,
individuality is maintained on spiritual grounds and is thus confirmed
by great acaryas like Sri Ramanuja and others. It is clearly mentionedin many places in the Gita that this spiritual individuality isunderstood by those who are devotees of the Lord. Those who are enviousof Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead have no bona fide accessto this great literature. The nondevotee's approach to the teachings ofthe Gita is something like bees licking on a bottle of honey. Onecannot have a taste of honey unless one opens the bottle. Similarly,the mysticism of the Bhagavad-gita can be understood only by devotees,and no one else can taste it, as it is stated in the Fourth Chapter ofthe book. Nor can the Gita be touched by persons who envy the veryexistence of the Lord. Therefore, the Mayavadi explanation of the Gitais a most misleading presentation of the whole truth. Lord Caitanya hasforbidden us to read commentations made by the Mayavadis and warns thatone who takes to such an understanding of the Mayavadi philosophy losesall power to understand the real mystery of the Gita. If individualityrefers to the empirical universe, then there is no need of teaching bythe Lord. The plurality of the individual soul and of the Lord is aneternal fact, and it is confirmed by the Vedas as above mentioned.
TEXT 13
dehino 'smin yatha dehe
kaumaram yauvanam jaratatha dehantara-praptirdhiras tatra na muhyati
SYNONYMSdehinah--of the embodied; asmin--in this; yatha--as; dehe--in the body;
kaumaram--boyhood; yauvanam--youth; jara--old age; tatha--similarly;deha-antara--transference of the body; praptih--achievement; dhirah--the sober; tatra--thereupon; na--never; muhyati--deluded.
TRANSLATIONAs the embodied soul continuously passes, in this body, from boyhood to
youth to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death.A self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change.
PURPORTSince every living entity is an individual soul, each is changing his
body every moment, manifesting sometimes as a child, sometimes as ayouth, and sometimes as an old man. Yet the same spirit soul is thereand does not undergo any change. This individual soul finally changesthe body at death and transmigrates to another body; and since it issure to have another body in the next birth--either material orspiritual--there was no cause for lamentation by Arjuna on account ofdeath, neither for Bhisma nor for Drona, for whom he was so muchconcerned. Rather, he should rejoice for their changing bodies from oldto new ones, thereby rejuvenating their energy. Such changes of bodyaccount for varieties of enjoyment or suffering, according to one'swork in life. So Bhisma and Drona, being noble souls, were surely goingto have either spiritual bodies in the next life, or at least life inheavenly bodies for superior enjoyment of material existence. So, ineither case, there was no cause of lamentation.
Any man who has perfect knowledge of the constitution of the individual
soul, the Supersoul and nature--both material and spiritual--is calleda dhira or a most sober man. Such a man is never deluded by the changeof bodies. The Mayavadi theory of oneness of the spirit soul cannot beentertained on the ground that the spirit soul cannot be cut intopieces as a fragmental portion. Such cutting into different individualsouls would make the Supreme cleavable or changeable, against theprinciple of the Supreme Soul being unchangeable. As confirmed in theGita, the fragmental portions of the Supreme exist eternally (sanatana)and are called ksara; that is, they have a tendency to fall down intomaterial nature. These fragmental portions are eternally so, and evenafter liberation, the individual soul remains the same--fragmental. Butonce liberated, he lives an eternal life in bliss and knowledge withthe Personality of Godhead. The theory of reflection can be applied tothe Supersoul, who is present in each and every individual body and isknown as the Paramatma, who is different from the individual livingentity. When the sky is reflected in water, the reflections representboth the sun and the moon and the stars also. The stars can be comparedto the living entities and the sun or the moon to the Supreme Lord. Theindividual fragmental spirit soul is represented by Arjuna, and theSupreme Soul is the Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna. They are not onthe same level, as it will be apparent in the beginning of the FourthChapter. If Arjuna is on the same level with Krsna, and Krsna is notsuperior to Arjuna, then their relationship of instructor andinstructed becomes meaningless. If both of them are deluded by theillusory energy (maya), then there is no need of one being theinstructor and the other the instructed. Such instruction would beuseless because, in the clutches of maya, no one can be anauthoritative instructor. Under the circumstances, it is admitted thatLord Krsna is the Supreme Lord, superior in position to the livingentity, Arjuna, who is a forgetful soul deluded by maya.
TEXT 14
matra-sparsas tu kaunteya
sitosna-sukha-duhkha-dahagamapayino 'nityastams titiksasva bharata
SYNONYMSmatra--sensuous; sparsah--perception; tu--only; kaunteya--O son of
Kunti; sita--winter; usna--summer; sukha--happiness; duhkha-dah--givingpain; agama--appearing; apayinah--disappearing; anityah--nonpermanent;tan--all of them; titiksasva--just try to tolerate; bharata--Odescendant of the Bharata dynasty.
TRANSLATIONO son of Kunti, the nonpermanent appearance of happiness and distress,
and their disappearance in due course, are like the appearance anddisappearance of winter and summer seasons. They arise from senseperception, O scion of Bharata, and one must learn to tolerate themwithout being disturbed.
PURPORT
In the proper discharge of duty, one has to learn to tolerate
nonpermanent appearances and disappearances of happiness and distress.According to Vedic injunction, one has to take his bath early in themorning even during the month of Magha (January-February). It is verycold at that time, but in spite of that a man who abides by thereligious principles does not hesitate to take his bath. Similarly, awoman does not hesitate to cook in the kitchen in the months of May andJune, the hottest part of the summer season. One has to execute hisduty in spite of climatic inconveniences. Similarly, to fight is thereligious principle of the ksatriyas, and although one has to fightwith some friend or relative, one should not deviate from hisprescribed duty. One has to follow the prescribed rules and regulationsof religious principles in order to rise up to the platform ofknowledge because by knowledge and devotion only can one liberatehimself from the clutches of maya (illusion).The two different names of address given to Arjuna are alsosignificant. To address him as Kaunteya signifies his great bloodrelations from his mother's side; and to address him as Bharatasignifies his greatness from his father's side. From both sides he issupposed to have a great heritage. A great heritage bringsresponsibility in the matter of proper discharge of duties; therefore,he cannot avoid fighting.
TEXT 15
yam hi na vyathayanty ete
purusam purusarsabhasama-duhkha-sukham dhiramso 'mrtatvaya kalpate
SYNONYMSyam--one whom; hi--certainly; na--never; vyathayanti--are distressing;
ete--all these; purusam--to a person; purusa-rsabha--O best among men;sama--unaltered; duhkha--distressed; sukham--happiness; dhiram--patient; sah--he; amrtatvaya--for liberation; kalpate--is consideredeligible.
TRANSLATIONO best among men [Arjuna], the person who is not disturbed by happiness
and distress and is steady in both is certainly eligible forliberation.
PURPORTAnyone who is steady in his determination for the advanced stage of
spiritual realization and can equally tolerate the onslaughts ofdistress and happiness is certainly a person eligible for liberation.In the varnasrama institution, the fourth stage of life, namely therenounced order (sannyasa), is a painstaking situation. But one who isserious about making his life perfect surely adopts the sannyasa orderof life in spite of all difficulties. The difficulties usually arisefrom having to sever family relationships, to give up the connection ofwife and children. But if anyone is able to tolerate such difficulties,surely his path to spiritual realization is complete. Similarly, inArjuna's discharge of duties as a ksatriya, he is advised to persevere,even if it is difficult to fight with his family members or similarly
beloved persons. Lord Caitanya took sannyasa at the age of twenty-four,
and His dependents, young wife as well as old mother, had no one elseto look after them. Yet for a higher cause He took sannyasa and wassteady in the discharge of higher duties. That is the way of achievingliberation from material bondage.
TEXT 16
nasato vidyate bhavo
nabhavo vidyate satahubhayor api drsto 'ntastv anayos tattva-darsibhih
SYNONYMSna--never; asatah--of the nonexistent; vidyate--there is; bhavah--
endurance; na--never; abhavah--changing quality; vidyate--there is;satah--of the eternal; ubhayoh--of the two; api--verily; drstah--observed; antah--conclusion; tu--but; anayoh--of them; tattva--truth;darsibhih--by the seers.
TRANSLATIONThose who are seers of the truth have concluded that of the nonexistent
there is no endurance, and of the existent there is no cessation. Thisseers have concluded by studying the nature of both.
PURPORTThere is no endurance of the changing body. That the body is changing
every moment by the actions and reactions of the different cells isadmitted by modern medical science; and thus growth and old age aretaking place in the body. But the spirit soul exists permanently,remaining the same despite all changes of the body and the mind. Thatis the difference between matter and spirit. By nature, the body isever changing, and the soul is eternal. This conclusion is establishedby all classes of seers of the truth, both impersonalist andpersonalist. In the Visnu Purana (2.12.38) it is stated that Visnu andHis abodes all have self-illuminated spiritual existence (jyotimsivisnur bhuvanani visnuh). The words existent and nonexistent refer onlyto spirit and matter. That is the version of all seers of truth.This is the beginning of the instruction by the Lord to the livingentities who are bewildered by the influence of ignorance. Removal ofignorance involves the reestablishment of the eternal relationshipbetween the worshiper and the worshipable and the consequentunderstanding of the difference between the part and parcel livingentities and the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One can understand thenature of the Supreme by thorough study of oneself, the differencebetween oneself and the Supreme being understood as the relationshipbetween the part and the whole. In the Vedanta-sutras, as well as inthe Srimad-Bhagavatam, the Supreme has been accepted as the origin ofall emanations. Such emanations are experienced by superior andinferior natural sequences. The living entities belong to the superiornature, as it will be revealed in the Seventh Chapter. Although thereis no difference between the energy and the energetic, the energetic isaccepted as the Supreme, and energy or nature is accepted as thesubordinate. The living entities, therefore, are always subordinate tothe Supreme Lord, as in the case of the master and the servant, or the
teacher and the taught. Such clear knowledge is impossible to
understand under the spell of ignorance, and to drive away suchignorance the Lord teaches the Bhagavad-gita for the enlightenment ofall living entities for all time.
TEXT 17
avinasi tu tad viddhi
yena sarvam idam tatamvinasam avyayasyasyana kascit kartum arhati
SYNONYMSavinasi--imperishable; tu--but; tat--that; viddhi--know it; yena--by
whom; sarvam--all of the body; idam--this; tatam--pervaded; vinasam--destruction; avyayasya--of the imperishable; asya--of it; na kascit--noone; kartum--to do; arhati--is able.
TRANSLATIONKnow that which pervades the entire body is indestructible. No one is
able to destroy the imperishable soul.
PURPORTThis verse more clearly explains the real nature of the soul, which is
spread all over the body. Anyone can understand what is spread all overthe body: it is consciousness. Everyone is conscious of the pains andpleasures of the body in part or as a whole. This spreading ofconsciousness is limited within one's own body. The pains and pleasuresof one body are unknown to another. Therefore, each and every body isthe embodiment of an individual soul, and the symptom of the soul'spresence is perceived as individual consciousness. This soul isdescribed as one ten-thousandth part of the upper portion of the hairpoint in size. The Svetasvatara Upanisad (5.9) confirms this:
balagra-sata-bhagasya
satadha kalpitasya cabhago jivah vijneyahsa canantyaya kalpate
"When the upper point of a hair is divided into one hundred parts and
again each of such parts is further divided into one hundred parts,each such part is the measurement of the dimension of the spirit soul."Similarly the same version is stated:
kesagra-sata-bhagasya
satamsah sadrsatmakahjivah suksma-svarupo 'yamsankhyatito hi cit-kanah
"There are innumerable particles of spiritual atoms, which are measured
as one ten-thousandth of the upper portion of the hair."Therefore, the individual particle of spirit soul is a spiritual atomsmaller than the material atoms, and such atoms are innumerable. Thisvery small spiritual spark is the basic principle of the material body,and the influence of such a spiritual spark is spread all over the body
as the influence of the active principle of some medicine spreads
throughout the body. This current of the spirit soul is felt all overthe body as consciousness, and that is the proof of the presence of thesoul. Any layman can understand that the material body minusconsciousness is a dead body, and this consciousness cannot be revivedin the body by any means of material administration. Therefore,consciousness is not due to any amount of material combination, but tothe spirit soul. In the Mundaka Upanisad (3.1.9) the measurement of theatomic spirit soul is further explained:
eso 'nur atma cetasa veditavyo
yasmin pranah pancadha samvivesapranais cittam sarvam otam prajanamyasmin visuddhe vibhavaty esa atma
"The soul is atomic in size and can be perceived by perfect
intelligence. This atomic soul is floating in the five kinds of air[prana, apana, vyana, samana and udana], is situated within the heart,and spreads its influence all over the body of the embodied livingentities. When the soul is purified from the contamination of the fivekinds of material air, its spiritual influence is exhibited."The hatha-yoga system is meant for controlling the five kinds of airencircling the pure soul by different kinds of sitting postures--notfor any material profit, but for liberation of the minute soul from theentanglement of the material atmosphere.So the constitution of the atomic soul is admitted in all Vedicliteratures, and it is also actually felt in the practical experienceof any sane man. Only the insane man can think of this atomic soul asall-pervading visnu-tattva.The influence of the atomic soul can be spread all over a particularbody. According to the Mundaka Upanisad, this atomic soul is situatedin the heart of every living entity, and because the measurement of theatomic soul is beyond the power of appreciation of the materialscientists, some of them assert foolishly that there is no soul. Theindividual atomic soul is definitely there in the heart along with theSupersoul, and thus all the energies of bodily movement are emanatingfrom this part of the body. The corpuscles which carry the oxygen fromthe lungs gather energy from the soul. When the soul passes away fromthis position, activity of the blood, generating fusion, ceases.Medical science accepts the importance of the red corpuscles, but itcannot ascertain that the source of the energy is the soul. Medicalscience, however, does admit that the heart is the seat of all energiesof the body.Such atomic particles of the spirit whole are compared to the sunshinemolecules. In the sunshine there are innumerable radiant molecules.Similarly, the fragmental parts of the Supreme Lord are atomic sparksof the rays of the Supreme Lord, called by the name prabha, or superiorenergy. Neither Vedic knowledge nor modern science denies the existenceof the spirit soul in the body, and the science of the soul isexplicitly described in the Bhagavad-gita by the Personality of GodheadHimself.
TEXT 18
antavanta ime deha
nityasyoktah saririnahanasino 'prameyasyatasmad yudhyasva bharata
SYNONYMS
anta-vantah--perishable; ime--all these; dehah--material bodies;
nityasya--eternal in existence; uktah--it is so said; saririnah--theembodied soul; anasinah--never to be destroyed; aprameyasya--immeasurable; tasmat--therefore; yudhyasva--fight; bharata--Odescendant of Bharata.
TRANSLATIONOnly the material body of the indestructible, immeasurable and eternal
living entity is subject to destruction; therefore, fight, O descendantof Bharata.
PURPORTThe material body is perishable by nature. It may perish immediately,
or it may do so after a hundred years. It is a question of time only.There is no chance of maintaining it indefinitely. But the spirit soulis so minute that it cannot even be seen by an enemy, to say nothing ofbeing killed. As mentioned in the previous verse, it is so small thatno one can have any idea how to measure its dimension. So from bothviewpoints there is no cause of lamentation because the living entitycan neither be killed as he is, nor can the material body, which cannotbe saved for any length of time, be permanently protected. The minuteparticle of the whole spirit acquires this material body according tohis work, and therefore observance of religious principles should beutilized. In the Vedanta-sutras the living entity is qualified as lightbecause he is part and parcel of the supreme light. As sunlightmaintains the entire universe, so the light of the soul maintains thismaterial body. As soon as the spirit soul is out of this material body,the body begins to decompose; therefore it is the spirit soul whichmaintains this body. The body itself is unimportant. Arjuna was advisedto fight and sacrifice the material body for the cause of religion.
TEXT 19
ya enam vetti hantaram
yas cainam manyate hatamubhau tau na vijanitonayam hanti na hanyate
SYNONYMSyah--anyone; enam--this; vetti--knows; hantaram--the killer; yah--
anyone; ca--also; enam--this; manyate--thinks; hatam--killed; ubhau--both of them; tau--they; na--never; vijanitah--in knowledge; na--never;ayam--this; hanti--kills; na--nor; hanyate--be killed.
TRANSLATIONHe who thinks that the living entity is the slayer or that he is slain,
does not understand. One who is in knowledge knows that the self slaysnot nor is slain.
PURPORT
When an embodied living entity is hurt by fatal weapons, it is to be
known that the living entity within the body is not killed. The spiritsoul is so small that it is impossible to kill him by any materialweapon, as is evident from the previous verses. Nor is the livingentity killable, because of his spiritual constitution. What is killed,or is supposed to be killed, is the body only. This, however, does notat all encourage killing of the body. The Vedic injunction is mahimsyat sarva bhutani: never commit violence to anyone. Nor doesunderstanding that the living entity is not killed encourage animalslaughter. Killing the body of anyone without authority is abominableand is punishable by the law of the state as well as by the law of theLord. Arjuna, however, is being engaged in killing for the principle ofreligion, and not whimsically.
TEXT 20
na jayate mriyate va kadacin
nayam bhutva bhavita va na bhuyahajo nityah sasvato 'yam puranona hanyate hanyamane sarire
SYNONYMSna--never; jayate--takes birth; mriyate--never dies; va--either;
kadacit--at any time (past, present or future); na--never; ayam--this;bhutva--came into being; bhavita--will come to be; va--or; na--not;bhuyah--or has coming to be; ajah--unborn; nityah--eternal; sasvatah--permanent; ayam--this; puranah--the oldest; na--never; hanyate--iskilled; hanyamane--being killed; sarire--by the body.
TRANSLATIONFor the soul there is never birth nor death. Nor, having once been,
does He ever cease to be. He is unborn, eternal, ever-existing, undyingand primeval. He is not slain when the body is slain.
PURPORTQualitatively, the small atomic fragmental part of the Supreme Spirit
is one with the Supreme. He undergoes no changes like the body.Sometimes the soul is called the steady, or kutastha. The body issubject to six kinds of transformations. It takes its birth from thewomb of the mother's body, remains for some time, grows, produces someeffects, gradually dwindles, and at last vanishes into oblivion. Thesoul, however, does not go through such changes. The soul is not born,but, because he takes on a material body, the body takes its birth. Thesoul does not take birth there, and the soul does not die. Anythingwhich has birth also has death. And because the soul has no birth, hetherefore has no past, present or future. He is eternal, ever-existing,and primeval--that is, there is no trace in history of his coming intobeing. Under the impression of the body, we seek the history of birth,etc., of the soul. The soul does not at any time become old, as thebody does. The so-called old man, therefore, feels himself to be in thesame spirit as in his childhood or youth. The changes of the body donot affect the soul. The soul does not deteriorate like a tree, noranything material. The soul has no by-product either. The by-productsof the body, namely children, are also different individual souls; and,owing to the body, they appear as children of a particular man. The
body develops because of the soul's presence, but the soul has neither
offshoots nor change. Therefore, the soul is free from the six changesof the body.In the Katha Upanisad (1.2.18) also we find a similar passage whichreads:
na jayate mriyate va vipascin
nayam kutascin na babhuva kascitajo nityah sasvato 'yam puranona hanyate hanyamane sarire
The meaning and purport of this verse is the same as in the Bhagavad-
gita, but here in this verse there is one special word, vipascit, whichmeans learned or with knowledge.The soul is full of knowledge, or full always with consciousness.Therefore, consciousness is the symptom of the soul. Even if one doesnot find the soul within the heart, where he is situated, one can stillunderstand the presence of the soul simply by the presence ofconsciousness. Sometimes we do not find the sun in the sky owing toclouds, or for some other reason, but the light of the sun is alwaysthere, and we are convinced that it is therefore daytime. As soon asthere is a little light in the sky early in the morning, we canunderstand that the sun is in the sky. Similarly, since there is someconsciousness in all bodies--whether man or animal--we can understandthe presence of the soul. This consciousness of the soul is, however,different from the consciousness of the Supreme because the supremeconsciousness is all-knowledge--past, present and future. Theconsciousness of the individual soul is prone to be forgetful. When heis forgetful of his real nature, he obtains education and enlightenmentfrom the superior lessons of Krsna. But Krsna is not like the forgetfulsoul. If so, Krsna's teachings of Bhagavad-gita would be useless.There are two kinds of souls--namely the minute particle soul (anu-atma) and the Supersoul (vibhu-atma). This is also confirmed in theKatha Upanisad (1.2.20) in this way:
anor aniyan mahato mahiyan
atmasya jantor nihito guhayamtam akratuh pasyati vita-sokodhatuh prasadan mahimanam atmanah
"Both the Supersoul [Paramatma] and the atomic soul [jivatma] are
situated on the same tree of the body within the same heart of theliving being, and only one who has become free from all materialdesires as well as lamentations can, by the grace of the Supreme,understand the glories of the soul." Krsna is the fountainhead of theSupersoul also, as it will be disclosed in the following chapters, andArjuna is the atomic soul, forgetful of his real nature; therefore herequires to be enlightened by Krsna, or by His bona fide representative(the spiritual master).
TEXT 21
vedavinasinam nityam
ya enam ajam avyayamkatham sa purusah parthakam ghatayati hanti kam
SYNONYMS
veda--in knowledge; avinasinam--indestructible; nityam--always; yah--
one who; enam--this (soul); ajam--unborn; avyayam--immutable; katham--how; sah--he; purusah--person; partha--O Partha (Arjuna); kam--whom;ghatayati--hurts; hanti--kills; kam--whom.
TRANSLATIONO Partha, how can a person who knows that the soul is indestructible,
unborn, eternal and immutable, kill anyone or cause anyone to kill?
PURPORTEverything has its proper utility, and a man who is situated in
complete knowledge knows how and where to apply a thing for its properutility. Similarly, violence also has its utility, and how to applyviolence rests with the person in knowledge. Although the justice ofthe peace awards capital punishment to a person condemned for murder,the justice of the peace cannot be blamed because he orders violence toanother person according to the codes of justice. In Manu-samhita, thelawbook for mankind, it is supported that a murderer should becondemned to death so that in his next life he will not have to sufferfor the great sin he has committed. Therefore, the king's punishment ofhanging a murderer is actually beneficial. Similarly, when Krsna ordersfighting, it must be concluded that violence is for supreme justice,and, as such, Arjuna should follow the instruction, knowing well thatsuch violence, committed in the act of fighting for Krsna, is notviolence at all because, at any rate, the man, or rather the soul,cannot be killed; so for the administration of justice, so-calledviolence is permitted. A surgical operation is not meant to kill thepatient, but to cure him. Therefore the fighting to be executed byArjuna at the instruction of Krsna is with full knowledge, so there isno possibility of sinful reaction.
TEXT 22
vasamsi jirnani yatha vihaya
navani grhnati naro 'paranitatha sarirani vihaya jirnanyanyani samyati navani dehi
SYNONYMSvasamsi--garments; jirnani--old and worn out; yatha--as it is; vihaya--
giving up; navani--new garments; grhnati--does accept; narah--a man;aparani--other; tatha--in the same way; sarirani--bodies; vihaya--giving up; jirnani--old and useless; anyani--different; samyati--verilyaccepts; navani--new sets; dehi--the embodied.
TRANSLATIONAs a person puts on new garments, giving up old ones, similarly, the
soul accepts new material bodies, giving up the old and useless ones.
PURPORTChange of body by the atomic individual soul is an accepted fact. Even
some of the modern scientists who do not believe in the existence of
the soul, but at the same time cannot explain the source of energy from
the heart, have to accept continuous changes of body which appear fromchildhood to boyhood and from boyhood to youth and again from youth toold age. From old age, the change is transferred to another body. Thishas already been explained in a previous verse.Transference of the atomic individual soul to another body is madepossible by the grace of the Supersoul. The Supersoul fulfills thedesire of the atomic soul as one friend fulfills the desire of another.The Vedas, like the Mundaka Upanisad, as well as the SvetasvataraUpanisad, compare the soul and the Supersoul to two friendly birdssitting on the same tree. One of the birds (the individual atomic soul)is eating the fruit of the tree, and the other bird (Krsna) is simplywatching His friend. Of these two birds--although they are the same inquality--one is captivated by the fruits of the material tree, whilethe other is simply witnessing the activities of His friend. Krsna isthe witnessing bird, and Arjuna is the eating bird. Although they arefriends, one is still the master and the other is the servant.Forgetfulness of this relationship by the atomic soul is the cause ofone's changing his position from one tree to another or from one bodyto another. The jiva soul is struggling very hard on the tree of thematerial body, but as soon as he agrees to accept the other bird as thesupreme spiritual master--as Arjuna agreed to do by voluntary surrenderunto Krsna for instruction--the subordinate bird immediately becomesfree from all lamentations. Both the Mundaka Upanisad (3.1.2) andSvetasvatara Upanisad (4.7) confirm this:
samane vrkse puruso nimagno
'nisaya socati muhyamanahjustam yada pasyaty anyam isamasya mahimanam iti vita-sokah
"Although the two birds are in the same tree, the eating bird is fully
engrossed with anxiety and moroseness as the enjoyer of the fruits ofthe tree. But if in some way or other he turns his face to his friendwho is the Lord and knows His glories--at once the suffering birdbecomes free from all anxieties." Arjuna has now turned his facetowards his eternal friend, Krsna, and is understanding the Bhagavad-gita from Him. And thus, hearing from Krsna, he can understand thesupreme glories of the Lord and be free from lamentation.Arjuna is advised herewith by the Lord not to lament for the bodilychange of his old grandfather and his teacher. He should rather behappy to kill their bodies in the righteous fight so that they may becleansed at once of all reactions from various bodily activities. Onewho lays down his life on the sacrificial altar, or in the properbattlefield, is at once cleansed of bodily reactions and promoted to ahigher status of life. So there was no cause for Arjuna's lamentation.
TEXT 23
nainam chindanti sastrani
nainam dahati pavakahna cainam kledayanty apona sosayati marutah
SYNONYMSna--never; enam--this soul; chindanti--can cut to pieces; sastrani--all
weapons; na--never; enam--unto this soul; dahati--burns; pavakah--fire;
na--never; ca--also; enam--unto this soul; kledayanti--moistens; apah--
water; na--never; sosayati--dries; marutah--wind.
TRANSLATIONThe soul can never be cut to pieces by any weapon, nor burned by fire,
nor moistened by water, nor withered by the wind.
PURPORTAll kinds of weapons, swords, flames, rains, tornadoes, etc.--are
unable to kill the spirit soul. It appears that there were many kindsof weapons made of earth, water, air, ether, etc., in addition to themodern weapons of fire. Even the nuclear weapons of the modern age areclassified as fire weapons, but formerly there were other weapons madeof all different kinds of material elements. Firearms were counteractedby water weapons, which are now unknown to modern science. Nor domodern scientists have knowledge of tornado weapons. Nonetheless, thesoul can never be cut into pieces, nor annihilated by any number ofweapons, regardless of scientific devices.Nor was it ever possible to cut the individual souls from the originalSoul. The Mayavadi, however, cannot describe how the individual soulevolved from ignorance and consequently became covered by illusoryenergy. Because they are atomic individual souls (sanatana) eternally,they are prone to be covered by the illusory energy, and thus theybecome separated from the association of the Supreme Lord, just as thesparks of the fire, although one in quality with the fire, are prone tobe extinguished when out of the fire. In the Varaha Purana, the livingentities are described as separated parts and parcels of the Supreme.They are eternally so, according to the Bhagavad-gita also. So, evenafter being liberated from illusion, the living entity remains aseparate identity, as is evident from the teachings of the Lord toArjuna. Arjuna became liberated by the knowledge received from Krsna,but he never became one with Krsna.
TEXT 24
acchedyo 'yam adahyo 'yam
akledyo 'sosya eva canityah sarva-gatah sthanuracalo 'yam sanatanah
SYNONYMSacchedyah--unbreakable; ayam--this soul; adahyah--cannot be burned;
ayam--this soul; akledyah--insoluble; asosyah--cannot be dried; eva--certainly; ca--and; nityah--everlasting; sarva-gatah--all-pervading;sthanuh--unchangeable; acalah--immovable; ayam--this soul; sanatanah--eternally the same.
TRANSLATIONThis individual soul is unbreakable and insoluble, and can be neither
burned nor dried. He is everlasting, all-pervading, unchangeable,immovable and eternally the same.
PURPORT
All these qualifications of the atomic soul definitely prove that the
individual soul is eternally the atomic particle of the spirit whole,and he remains the same atom eternally, without change. The theory ofmonism is very difficult to apply in this case, because the individualsoul is never expected to become one homogeneously. After liberationfrom material contamination, the atomic soul may prefer to remain as aspiritual spark in the effulgent rays of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, but the intelligent souls enter into the spiritual planets toassociate with the Personality of Godhead.The word sarva-gata ("all-pervading") is significant because there isno doubt that living entities are all over God's creation. They live onthe land, in the water, in the air, within the earth and even withinfire. The belief that they are sterilized in fire is not acceptable,because it is clearly stated here that the soul cannot be burned byfire. Therefore, there is no doubt that there are living entities alsoin the sun planet with suitable bodies to live there. If the sun globeis uninhabited, then the word sarva-gata--"living everywhere"--becomesmeaningless.
TEXT 25
avyakto 'yam acintyo 'yam
avikaryo 'yam ucyatetasmad evam viditvainamnanusocitum arhasi
SYNONYMSavyaktah--invisible; ayam--this soul; acintyah--inconceivable; ayam--
this soul; avikaryah--unchangeable; ayam--this soul; ucyate--is said;tasmat--therefore; evam--like this; viditva--knowing it well; enam--this soul; na--do not; anusocitum--may lament over; arhasi--youdeserve.
TRANSLATIONIt is said that the soul is invisible, inconceivable, immutable, and
unchangeable. Knowing this, you should not grieve for the body.
PURPORTAs described previously, the magnitude of the soul is so small for our
material calculation that he cannot be seen even by the most powerfulmicroscope; therefore, he is invisible. As far as the soul's existenceis concerned, no one can establish his existence experimentally beyondthe proof of sruti, or Vedic wisdom. We have to accept this truth,because there is no other source of understanding the existence of thesoul, although it is a fact by perception. There are many things wehave to accept solely on grounds of superior authority. No one can denythe existence of his father, based upon the authority of his mother.There is no source of understanding the identity of the father exceptby the authority of the mother. Similarly, there is no source ofunderstanding the soul except by studying the Vedas. In other words,the soul is inconceivable by human experimental knowledge. The soul isconsciousness and conscious--that also is the statement of the Vedas,and we have to accept that. Unlike the bodily changes, there is nochange in the soul. As eternally unchangeable, the soul remains atomicin comparison to the infinite Supreme Soul. The Supreme Soul is
infinite, and the atomic soul is infinitesimal. Therefore, the
infinitesimal soul, being unchangeable, can never become equal to theinfinite soul, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This concept isrepeated in the Vedas in different ways just to confirm the stabilityof the conception of the soul. Repetition of something is necessary inorder that we understand the matter thoroughly, without error.
TEXT 26
atha cainam nitya-jatam
nityam va manyase mrtamtathapi tvam maha-bahonainam socitum arhasi
SYNONYMSatha--if, however; ca--also; enam--this soul; nitya-jatam--always born;
nityam--forever; va--either; manyase--so think; mrtam--dead; tatha api--still; tvam--you; maha-baho--O mighty-armed one; na--never; enam--about the soul; socitum--to lament; arhasi--deserve.
TRANSLATIONIf, however, you think that the soul is perpetually born and always
dies still, you still have no reason to lament, O mighty-armed.
PURPORTThere is always a class of philosophers, almost akin to the Buddhists,
who do not believe in the separate existence of the soul beyond thebody. When Lord Krsna spoke the Bhagavad-gita, it appears that suchphilosophers existed, and they were known as the lokayatikas andvaibhasikas. These philosophers maintained that life symptoms, or soul,takes place at a certain mature condition of material combination. Themodern material scientist and materialist philosophers also thinksimilarly. According to them, the body is a combination of physicalelements, and at a certain stage the life symptoms develop byinteraction of the physical body and chemical elements. The science ofanthropology is based on this philosophy. Currently, many pseudoreligions--now becoming fashionable in America--are also adhering tothis philosophy, as well as to the nihilistic nondevotional Buddhistsects.Even if Arjuna did not believe in the existence of the soul--as in thevaibhasika philosophy--there would still have been no cause forlamentation. No one laments the loss of a certain bulk of chemicals andstops discharging his prescribed duty. On the other hand, in modernscience and scientific warfare, so many tons of chemicals are wastedfor achieving victory over the enemy. According to the vaibhasikaphilosophy, the so-called soul or atma vanishes along with thedeterioration of the body. So, in any case, whether Arjuna accepted theVedic conclusion that there is an atomic soul, or whether he did notbelieve in the existence of the soul, he had no reason to lament.According to this theory, since there are so many living entitiesgenerating out of matter every moment, and so many of them are beingvanquished at every moment, there is no need to grieve for such anincidence. However, since he was not risking rebirth of the soul,Arjuna had no reason to be afraid of being affected with sinfulreactions due to his killing his grandfather and teacher. But at the
same time, Krsna sarcastically addressed Arjuna as maha-bahu, mighty-
armed, because He, at least, did not accept the theory of thevaibhasikas, which leaves aside the Vedic wisdom. As a ksatriya, Arjunabelonged to the Vedic culture, and it behooved him to continue tofollow its principles.
TEXT 27
jatasya hi dhruvo mrtyur
dhruvam janma mrtasya catasmad apariharye 'rthena tvam socitum arhasi
SYNONYMSjatasya--one who has taken his birth; hi--certainly; dhruvah--a fact;
mrtyuh--death; dhruvam--it is also a fact; janma--birth; mrtasya--ofthe dead; ca--also; tasmat--therefore; apariharye--for that which isunavoidable; arthe--in the matter of; na--do not; tvam--you; socitum--to lament; arhasi--deserve.
TRANSLATIONFor one who has taken his birth, death if certain; and for one who is
dead, birth is certain. Therefore, in the unavoidable discharge of yourduty, you should not lament.
PURPORTOne has to take birth according to one's activities of life. And, after
finishing one term of activities, one has to die to take birth for thenext. In this way the cycle of birth and death is revolving, one afterthe other without liberation. This cycle of birth and death does not,however, support unnecessary murder, slaughter and war. But at the sametime, violence and war are inevitable factors in human society forkeeping law and order.The Battle of Kuruksetra, being the will of the Supreme, was aninevitable event, and to fight for the right cause is the duty of aksatriya. Why should he be afraid of or aggrieved at the death of hisrelatives since he was discharging his proper duty? He did not deserveto break the law, thereby becoming subjected to the reactions of sinfulacts, of which he was so afraid. By avoiding the discharge of hisproper duty, he would not be able to stop the death of his relatives,and he would be degraded due to his selection of the wrong path ofaction.
TEXT 28
avyaktadini bhutani
vyakta-madhyani bharataavyakta-nidhanany evatatra ka paridevana
SYNONYMSavyakta-adini--in the beginning unmanifested; bhutani--all that are
created; vyakta--manifested; madhyani--in the middle; bharata--Odescendant of Bharata; avyakta--nonmanifested; nidhanani--all that are
vanquished; eva--it is all like that; tatra--therefore; ka--what;
paridevana--lamentation.
TRANSLATIONAll created beings are unmanifest in their beginning, manifest in their
interim state, and unmanifest again when they are annihilated. So whatneed is there for lamentation?
PURPORTAccepting that there are two classes of philosophers, one believing in
the existence of the soul and the other not believing in the existenceof the soul, there is no cause for lamentation in either case.Nonbelievers in the existence of the soul are called atheists byfollowers of Vedic wisdom. Yet even if, for argument's sake, we acceptthe atheistic theory, there is still no cause for lamentation. Apartfrom the separate existence of the soul, the material elements remainunmanifested before creation. From this subtle state of unmanifestationcomes manifestation, just as from ether, air is generated; from air,fire is generated; from fire, water is generated; and from water, earthbecomes manifested. From the earth, many varieties of manifestationstake place. Take, for example, a big skyscraper manifested from theearth. When it is dismantled, the manifestation becomes againunmanifested and remains as atoms in the ultimate stage. The law ofconservation of energy remains, but in course of time things aremanifested and unmanifested--that is the difference. Then what cause isthere for lamentation either in the stage of manifestation or inunmanifestation? Somehow or other, even in the unmanifested stage,things are not lost. Both at the beginning and at the end, all elementsremain unmanifested, and only in the middle are they manifested, andthis does not make any real material difference.And if we accept the Vedic conclusion as stated in the Bhagavad-gita(antavanta ime dehah) that these material bodies are perishable in duecourse of time (nityasyoktah saririnah) but that the soul is eternal,then we must remember always that the body is like a dress; thereforewhy lament the changing of a dress? The material body has no factualexistence in relation to the eternal soul. It is something like adream. In a dream we may think of flying in the sky, or sitting on achariot as a king, but when we wake up we can see that we are neitherin the sky nor seated on the chariot. The Vedic wisdom encourages self-realization on the basis of the nonexistence of the material body.Therefore, in either case, whether one believes in the existence of thesoul, or one does not believe in the existence of the soul, there is nocause for lamentation for loss of the body.
TEXT 29
ascarya-vat pasyati kascid enam
ascarya-vad vadati tathaiva canyahascarya-vac cainam anyah srnotisrutvapy enam veda na caiva kascit
SYNONYMSascarya-vat--amazing; pasyati--see; kascit--some; enam--this soul;
ascarya-vat--amazing; vadati--speak; tatha--there; eva--certainly; ca--also; anyah--another; ascarya-vat--similarly amazing; ca--also; enam--
this soul; anyah--others; srnoti--hear; srutva--having heard; api--
even; enam--this soul; veda--do know; na--never; ca--and; eva--certainly; kascit--anyone.
TRANSLATIONSome look at the soul as amazing, some describe him as amazing, and
some hear of him as amazing, while others, even after hearing abouthim, cannot understand him at all.
PURPORTSince Gitopanisad is largely based on the principles of the Upanisads,
it is not surprising to also find this passage in the Katha Upanisad(1.2.7):
sravanayapi bahubhir yo na labhyah
srnvanto 'pi bahavo yam na vidyuhascaryo vakta kusalo 'sya labdhaascaryo 'sya jnata kusalanusistah
The fact that the atomic soul is within the body of a gigantic animal,
in the body of a gigantic banyan tree, and also in the microbic germs,millions and billions of which occupy only an inch of space, iscertainly very amazing. Men with a poor fund of knowledge and men whoare not austere cannot understand the wonders of the individual atomicspark of spirit, even though it is explained by the greatest authorityof knowledge, who imparted lessons even to Brahma, the first livingbeing in the universe. Owing to a gross material conception of things,most men in this age cannot imagine how such a small particle canbecome both so great and so small. So men look at the soul proper aswonderful either by constitution or by description. Illusioned by thematerial energy, people are so engrossed in subject matter for sensegratification that they have very little time to understand thequestion of self-understanding, even though it is a fact that withoutthis self-understanding all activities result in ultimate defeat in thestruggle for existence. Perhaps one has no idea that one must think ofthe soul, and thus make a solution of the material miseries.Some people who are inclined to hear about the soul may be attendinglectures, in good association, but sometimes, owing to ignorance, theyare misguided by acceptance of the Supersoul and the atomic soul as onewithout distinction of magnitude. It is very difficult to find a manwho perfectly understands the position of the soul, the Supersoul, theatomic soul, their respective functions, relationships and all othermajor and minor details. And it is still more difficult to find a manwho has actually derived full benefit from knowledge of the soul, andwho is able to describe the position of the soul in different aspects.But if, somehow or other, one is able to understand the subject matterof the soul, then one's life is successful. The easiest process forunderstanding the subject matter of self, however, is to accept thestatements of the Bhagavad-gita spoken by the greatest authority, LordKrsna, without being deviated by other theories. But it also requires agreat deal of penance and sacrifice, either in this life or in theprevious ones, before one is able to accept Krsna as the SupremePersonality of Godhead. Krsna can, however, be known as such by thecauseless mercy of the pure devotee and by no other way.
TEXT 30
dehi nityam avadhyo 'yam
dehe sarvasya bharatatasmat sarvani bhutanina tvam socitum arhasi
SYNONYMSdehi--the owner of the material body; nityam--eternally; avadhyah--
cannot be killed; ayam--this soul; dehe--in the body; sarvasya--ofeveryone; bharata--O descendant of Bharata; tasmat--therefore; sarvani--all; bhutani--living entities (that are born); na--never; tvam--yourself; socitum--to lament; arhasi--deserve.
TRANSLATIONO descendant of Bharata, he who dwells in the body is eternal and can
never be slain. Therefore you need not grieve for any creature.
PURPORTThe Lord now concludes the chapter of instruction on the immutable
spirit soul. In describing the immortal soul in various ways, LordKrsna establishes that the soul is immortal and the body is temporary.Therefore Arjuna as a ksatriya should not abandon his duty out of fearthat his grandfather and teacher--Bhisma and Drona--will die in thebattle. On the authority of Sri Krsna, one has to believe that there isa soul different from the material body, not that there is no suchthing as soul, or that living symptoms develop at a certain stage ofmaterial maturity resulting from the interaction of chemicals. Thoughthe soul is immortal, violence is not encouraged, but at the time ofwar it is not discouraged when there is actual need for it. That needmust be justified in terms of the sanction of the Lord, and notcapriciously.
TEXT 31
sva-dharmam api caveksya
na vikampitum arhasidharmyad dhi yuddhac chreyo 'nyatksatriyasya na vidyate
SYNONYMSsva-dharmam--one's own religious principles; api--also; ca--indeed;
aveksya--considering; na--never; vikampitum--to hesitate; arhasi--youdeserve; dharmyat--from religious principles; hi--indeed; yuddhat--thanfighting; sreyah--better engagements; anyat--anything else;ksatriyasya--of the ksatriya; na--does not; vidyate--exist.
TRANSLATIONConsidering your specific duty as a ksatriya, you should know that
there is no better engagement for you than fighting on religiousprinciples; and so there is no need for hesitation.
PURPORT
Out of the four orders of social administration, the second order, for
the matter of good administration, is called ksatriya. Ksat means hurt.One who gives protection from harm is called ksatriya (trayate--to giveprotection). The ksatriyas are trained for killing in the forest. Aksatriya would go into the forest and challenge a tiger face to faceand fight with the tiger with his sword. When the tiger was killed, itwould be offered the royal order of cremation. This system is beingfollowed even up to the present day by the ksatriya kings of the Jaipurstate. The ksatriyas are specially trained for challenging and killingbecause religious violence is sometimes a necessary factor. Therefore,ksatriyas are never meant for accepting directly the order of sannyasaor renunciation. Nonviolence in politics may be a diplomacy, but it isnever a factor or principle. In the religious law books it is stated:
ahavesu mitho 'nyonyam
jighamsanto mahi-ksitahyuddhamanah param saktyasvargam yanty aparan-mukhah
yajnesu pasavo brahman
hanyante satatam dvijaihsamskrtah kila mantrais cate 'pi svargam avapnuvan
"In the battlefield, a king or ksatriya, while fighting another king
envious of him, is eligible for achieving heavenly planets after death,as the brahmanas also attain the heavenly planets by sacrificinganimals in the sacrificial fire." Therefore, killing on the battlefieldon religious principles and the killing of animals in the sacrificialfire are not at all considered to be acts of violence, because everyoneis benefited by the religious principles involved. The animalsacrificed gets a human life immediately without undergoing the gradualevolutionary process from one form to another, and the ksatriyas killedin the battlefield also attain the heavenly planets as do the brahmanaswho attain them by offering sacrifice.There are two kinds of sva-dharmas, specific duties. As long as one isnot liberated, one has to perform the duties of his particular body inaccordance with religious principles in order to achieve liberation.When one is liberated, one's sva-dharma--specific duty--becomesspiritual and is not in the material bodily concept. In the bodilyconception of life there are specific duties for the brahmanas andksatriyas respectively, and such duties are unavoidable. Sva-dharma isordained by the Lord, and this will be clarified in the Fourth Chapter.On the bodily plane sva-dharma is called varnasrama-dharma, or man'ssteppingstone for spiritual understanding. Human civilization beginsfrom the stage of varnasrama-dharma, or specific duties in terms of thespecific modes of nature of the body obtained. Discharging one'sspecific duty in any field of action in accordance with varnasrama-dharma serves to elevate one to a higher status of life.
TEXT 32
yadrcchaya copapannam
svarga-dvaram apavrtamsukhinah ksatriyah parthalabhante yuddham idrsam
SYNONYMS
yadrcchaya--by its own accord; ca--also; upapannam--arrived at; svarga-
-heavenly planet; dvaram--door; apavrtam--wide open; sukhinah--veryhappy; ksatriyah--the members of the royal order; partha--O son ofPrtha; labhante--do achieve; yuddham--war; idrsam--like this.
TRANSLATIONO Partha, happy are the ksatriyas to whom such fighting opportunities
come unsought, opening for them the doors of the heavenly planets.
PURPORTAs supreme teacher of the world, Lord Krsna condemns the attitude of
Arjuna who said, "I do not find any good in this fighting. It willcause perpetual habitation in hell." Such statements by Arjuna were dueto ignorance only. He wanted to become nonviolent in the discharge ofhis specific duty. For a ksatriya to be in the battlefield and tobecome nonviolent is the philosophy of fools. In the Parasara-smrti, orreligious codes made by Parasara, the great sage and father ofVyasadeva, it is stated:
ksatriyo hi praja raksan
sastra-panih pradandayannirjitya para-sainyadiksitim dharmena palayet
"The ksatriya's duty is to protect the citizens from all kinds of
difficulties, and for that reason he has to apply violence in suitablecases for law and order. Therefore he has to conquer the soldiers ofinimical kings, and thus, with religious principles, he should ruleover the world."Considering all aspects, Arjuna had no reason to refrain from fighting.If he should conquer his enemies, he would enjoy the kingdom; and if heshould die in the battle, he would be elevated to the heavenly planetswhose doors were wide open to him. Fighting would be for his benefit ineither case.
TEXT 33
atha cet tvam imam dharmyam
sangramam na karisyasitatah sva-dharmam kirtim cahitva papam avapsyasi
SYNONYMSatha--therefore; cet--if; tvam--you; imam--this; dharmyam--religious
duty; sangramam--fighting; na--do not; karisyasi--perform; tatah--then;sva-dharmam--your religious duty; kirtim--reputation; ca--also; hitva--losing; papam--sinful reaction; avapsyasi--do gain.
TRANSLATIONIf, however, you do not fight this religious war, then you will
certainly incur sins for neglecting your duties and thus lose yourreputation as a fighter.
PURPORT
Arjuna was a famous fighter, and he attained fame by fighting many
great demigods, including even Lord Siva. After fighting and defeatingLord Siva in the dress of a hunter, Arjuna pleased the lord andreceived as a reward a weapon called pasupata-astra. Everyone knew thathe was a great warrior. Even Dronacarya gave him benedictions andawarded him the special weapon by which he could kill even his teacher.So he was credited with so many military certificates from manyauthorities, including his adopted father Indra, the heavenly king. Butif he abandoned the battle, he would not only neglect his specific dutyas a ksatriya, but he would lose all fame and good name and thusprepare his royal road to hell. In other words, he would go to hell,not by fighting, but by withdrawing from battle.
TEXT 34
akirtim capi bhutani
kathayisyanti te 'vyayamsambhavitasya cakirtirmaranad atiricyate
SYNONYMSakirtim--infamy; ca--also; api--over and above; bhutani--all people;
kathayisyanti--will speak; te--of you; avyayam--forever; sambhavitasya--for a respectable man; ca--also; akirtih--ill fame; maranat--thandeath; atiricyate--becomes more than.
TRANSLATIONPeople will always speak of your infamy, and for one who has been
honored, dishonor is worse than death.
PURPORTBoth as a friend and philosopher to Arjuna, Lord Krsna now gives His
final judgment regarding Arjuna's refusal to fight. The Lord says,"Arjuna, if you leave the battlefield, people will call you a cowardeven before your actual fight. And if you think that people may callyou bad names but that you will save your life by fleeing thebattlefield, then My advice is that you'd better die in the battle. Fora respectable man like you, ill fame is worse than death. So, youshould not flee for fear of your life; better die in the battle. Thatwill save you from the ill fame of misusing My friendship and losingyour prestige in society."So, the final judgment of the Lord was for Arjuna to die in the battleand not withdraw.
TEXT 35
bhayad ranad uparatam
mamsyante tvam maha-rathahyesam ca tvam bahu-matobhutva yasyasi laghavam
SYNONYMS
bhayat--out of fear; ranat--from the battlefield; uparatam--ceased;
mamsyante--will consider; tvam--unto you; maha-rathah--the greatgenerals; yesam--of those who; ca--also; tvam--you; bahu-matah--ingreat estimation; bhutva--will become; yasyasi--will go; laghavam--decreased in value.
TRANSLATIONThe great generals who have highly esteemed your name and fame will
think that you have left the battlefield out of fear only, and thusthey will consider you a coward.
PURPORTLord Krsna continued to give His verdict to Arjuna: "Do not think that
the great generals like Duryodhana, Karna, and other contemporarieswill think that you have left the battlefield out of compassion foryour brothers and grandfather. They will think that you have left outof fear for your life. And thus their high estimation of yourpersonality will go to hell."
TEXT 36
avacya-vadams ca bahun
vadisyanti tavahitahnindantas tava samarthyamtato duhkhataram nu kim
SYNONYMSavacya--unkind; vadan--fabricated words; ca--also; bahun--many;
vadisyanti--will say; tava--your; ahitah--enemies; nindantah--whilevilifying; tava--your; samarthyam--ability; tatah--thereafter; duhkha-taram--more painful; nu--of course; kim--what is there.
TRANSLATIONYour enemies will describe you in many unkind words and scorn your
ability. What could be more painful for you?
PURPORTLord Krsna was astonished in the beginning at Arjuna's uncalled-for
plea for compassion, and He described his compassion as befitting thenon-Aryans. Now in so many words, He has proved His statements againstArjuna's so-called compassion.
TEXT 37
hato va prapsyasi svargam
jitva va bhoksyase mahimtasmad uttistha kaunteyayuddhaya krta-niscayah
SYNONYMShatah--being killed; va--either; prapsyasi--you will gain; svargam--the
heavenly kingdom; jitva--by conquering; va--or; bhoksyase--you enjoy;
mahim--the world; tasmat--therefore; uttistha--get up; kaunteya--O son
of Kunti; yuddhaya--to fight; krta--determined; niscayah--uncertainty.
TRANSLATIONO son of Kunti, either you will be killed on the battlefield and attain
the heavenly planets, or you will conquer and enjoy the earthlykingdom. Therefore get up and fight with determination.
PURPORTEven though there was no certainty of victory for Arjuna's side, he
still had to fight; for, even being killed there, he could be elevatedinto the heavenly planets.
TEXT 38
sukha-duhkhe same krtva
labhalabhau jayajayautato yuddhaya yujyasvanaivam papam avapsyasi
SYNONYMSsukha--happiness; duhkhe--in distress; same--in equanimity; krtva--
doing so; labha-alabhau--both in loss and profit; jaya-ajayau--both indefeat and victory; tatah--thereafter; yuddhaya--for the sake offighting; yujyasva--do fight; na--never; evam--in this way; papam--sinful reaction; avapsyasi--you will gain.
TRANSLATIONDo thou fight for the sake of fighting, without considering happiness
or distress, loss or gain, victory or defeat--and, by so doing, youshall never incur sin.
PURPORTLord Krsna now directly says that Arjuna should fight for the sake of
fighting because He desires the battle. There is no consideration ofhappiness or distress, profit or gain, victory or defeat in theactivities of Krsna consciousness. That everything should be performedfor the sake of Krsna is transcendental consciousness; so there is noreaction to material activities. He who acts for his own sensegratification, either in goodness or in passion, is subject to thereaction, good or bad. But he who has completely surrendered himself inthe activities of Krsna consciousness is no longer obliged to anyone,nor is he a debtor to anyone, as one is in the ordinary course ofactivities. It is said:
devarsi-bhutapta-nrnam pitrnam
na kinkaro nayam rni ca rajansarvatmana yah saranam saranyamgato mukundam parihrtya kartam
"Anyone who has completely surrendered unto Krsna, Mukunda, giving up
all other duties, is no longer a debtor, nor is he obliged to anyone--not the demigods, nor the sages, nor the people in general, nor
kinsmen, nor humanity, nor forefathers." (Bhag. 11.5.41) That is the
indirect hint given by Krsna to Arjuna in this verse, and the matterwill be more clearly explained in the following verses.
TEXT 39
esa te 'bhihita sankhye
buddhir yoge tv imam srnubuddhya yukto yaya parthakarma-bandham prahasyasi
SYNONYMSesa--all these; te--unto you; abhihita--described; sankhye--by
analytical study; buddhih--intelligence; yoge--work without fruitiveresult; tu--but; imam--this; srnu--just hear; buddhya--by intelligence;yuktah--dovetailed; yaya--by which; partha--O son of Prtha; karma-bandham--bondage of reaction; prahasyasi--you can be released from.
TRANSLATIONThus far I have declared to you the analytical knowledge of sankhya
philosophy. Now listen to the knowledge of yoga whereby one workswithout fruitive result. O son of Prtha, when you act by suchintelligence, you can free yourself from the bondage of works.
PURPORTAccording to the Nirukti, or the Vedic dictionary, sankhya means that
which describes phenomena in detail, and sankhya refers to thatphilosophy which describes the real nature of the soul. And yogainvolves controlling the senses. Arjuna's proposal not to fight wasbased on sense gratification. Forgetting his prime duty, he wanted tocease fighting because he thought by not killing his relatives andkinsmen he would be happier than by enjoying the kingdom by conqueringhis cousins and brothers, the sons of Dhrtarastra. In both ways, thebasic principles were for sense gratification. Happiness derived fromconquering them and happiness derived by seeing kinsmen alive are bothon the basis of personal sense gratification, for there is a sacrificeof wisdom and duty. Krsna, therefore, wanted to explain to Arjuna thatby killing the body of his grandfather he would not be killing the soulproper, and He explained that all individual persons, including theLord Himself, are eternal individuals; they were individuals in thepast, they are individuals in the present, and they will continue toremain individuals in the future, because all of us are individualsouls eternally, and we simply change our bodily dress in differentmanners. But, actually, we keep our individuality even after liberationfrom the bondage of material dress. An analytical study of the soul andthe body has been very graphically explained by Lord Krsna. And thisdescriptive knowledge of the soul and the body from different angles ofvision has been described here as Sankhya, in terms of the Niruktidictionary. This Sankhya has nothing to do with the Sankhya philosophyof the atheist Kapila. Long before the imposter Kapila's Sankhya, theSankhya philosophy was expounded in the Srimad-Bhagavatam by the trueLord Kapila, the incarnation of Lord Krsna, who explained it to Hismother, Devahuti. It is clearly explained by Him that the purusa, orthe Supreme Lord, is active and that He creates by looking over theprakrti. This is accepted in the Vedas and in the Gita. The description
in the Vedas indicates that the Lord glanced over the prakrti, or
nature, and impregnated it with atomic individual souls. All theseindividuals are working in the material world for sense gratification,and under the spell of material energy they are thinking of beingenjoyers. This mentality is dragged to the last point of liberationwhen the living entity wants to become one with the Lord. This is thelast snare of maya or sense gratificatory illusion, and it is onlyafter many, many births of such sense gratificatory activities that agreat soul surrenders unto Vasudeva, Lord Krsna, thereby fulfilling thesearch after the ultimate truth.Arjuna has already accepted Krsna as his spiritual master bysurrendering himself unto Him: sisyas te 'ham sadhi mam tvam prapannam.Consequently, Krsna will now tell him about the working process inbuddhi-yoga, or karma-yoga, or in other words, the practice ofdevotional service only for the sense gratification of the Lord. Thisbuddhi-yoga is clearly explained in Chapter Ten, verse ten, as beingdirect communion with the Lord, who is sitting as Paramatma ineveryone's heart. But such communion does not take place withoutdevotional service. One who is therefore situated in devotional ortranscendental loving service to the Lord, or, in other words, in Krsnaconsciousness, attains to this stage of buddhi-yoga by the specialgrace of the Lord. The Lord says, therefore, that only to those who arealways engaged in devotional service out of transcendental love does Heaward the pure knowledge of devotion in love. In that way the devoteecan reach Him easily in the ever-blissful kingdom of God.Thus the buddhi-yoga mentioned in this verse is the devotional serviceof the Lord, and the word Sankhya mentioned herein has nothing to dowith the atheistic sankhya-yoga enunciated by the imposter Kapila. Oneshould not, therefore, misunderstand that the sankhya-yoga mentionedherein has any connection with the atheistic Sankhya. Nor did thatphilosophy have any influence during that time; nor would Lord Krsnacare to mention such godless philosophical speculations. Real Sankhyaphilosophy is described by Lord Kapila in the Srimad-Bhagavatam, buteven that Sankhya has nothing to do with the current topics. Here,Sankhya means analytical description of the body and the soul. LordKrsna made an analytical description of the soul just to bring Arjunato the point of buddhi-yoga, or bhakti-yoga. Therefore, Lord Krsna'sSankhya and Lord Kapila's Sankhya, as described in the Bhagavatam, areone and the same. They are all bhakti-yoga. He said, therefore, thatonly the less intelligent class of men make a distinction betweensankhya-yoga and bhakti-yoga.Of course, atheistic sankhya-yoga has nothing to do with bhakti-yoga,yet the unintelligent claim that the atheistic sankhya-yoga is referredto in the Bhagavad-gita.One should therefore understand that buddhi-yoga means to work in Krsnaconsciousness, in the full bliss and knowledge of devotional service.One who works for the satisfaction of the Lord only, however difficultsuch work may be, is working under the principles of buddhi-yoga andfinds himself always in transcendental bliss. By such transcendentalengagement, one achieves all transcendental qualities automatically, bythe grace of the Lord, and thus his liberation is complete in itself,without his making extraneous endeavors to acquire knowledge. There ismuch difference between work in Krsna consciousness and work forfruitive results, especially in the matter of sense gratification forachieving results in terms of family or material happiness. Buddhi-yogais therefore the transcendental quality of the work that we perform.
TEXT 40
nehabhikrama-naso 'sti
pratyavayo na vidyatesv-alpam apy asya dharmasyatrayate mahato bhayat
SYNONYMSna--there is not; iha--in this world; abhikrama--endeavoring; nasah--
loss; asti--there is; pratyavayah--diminution; na--never; vidyate--there is; su-alpam--a little; api--although; asya--of this; dharmasya--of this occupation; trayate--releases; mahatah--of very great; bhayat--danger.
TRANSLATIONIn this endeavor there is no loss or diminution, and a little
advancement on this path can protect one from the most dangerous typeof fear.
PURPORTActivity in Krsna consciousness, or acting for the benefit of Krsna
without expectation of sense gratification, is the highesttranscendental quality of work. Even a small beginning of such activityfinds no impediment, nor can that small beginning be lost at any stage.Any work begun on the material plane has to be completed, otherwise thewhole attempt becomes a failure. But any work begun in Krsnaconsciousness has a permanent effect, even though not finished. Theperformer of such work is therefore not at a loss even if his work inKrsna consciousness is incomplete. One percent done in Krsnaconsciousness bears permanent results, so that the next beginning isfrom the point of two percent; whereas, in material activity, without ahundred percent success, there is no profit. Ajamila performed his dutyin some percentage of Krsna consciousness, but the result he enjoyed atthe end was a hundred percent, by the grace of the Lord. There is anice verse in this connection in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.5.17):
tyaktva sva-dharmam caranambujam harer
bhajann apakvo 'tha patet tato yadiyatra kva vabhadram abhud amusya kimko vartha apto 'bhajatam sva-dharmatah
"If someone gives up self-gratificatory pursuits and works in Krsna
consciousness and then falls down on account of not completing hiswork, what loss is there on his part? And, what can one gain if oneperforms his material activities perfectly?" Or, as the Christians say,"What profiteth a man if he gain the whole world yet suffers the lossof his eternal soul?"Material activities and their results end with the body. But work inKrsna consciousness carries a person again to Krsna consciousness, evenafter the loss of the body. At least one is sure to have a chance inthe next life of being born again as a human being, either in thefamily of a great cultured brahmana or in a rich aristocratic familythat will give one a further chance for elevation. That is the uniquequality of work done in Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 41
vyavasayatmika buddhir
ekeha kuru-nandanabahu-sakha hy anantas cabuddhayo 'vyavasayinam
SYNONYMSvyavasaya-atmika--resolute Krsna consciousness; buddhih--intelligence;
eka--only one; iha--in this world; kuru-nandana--O beloved child of theKurus; bahu-sakhah--various branches; hi--indeed; anantah--unlimited;ca--also; buddhayah--intelligence; avyavasayinam--of those who are notin Krsna consciousness.
TRANSLATIONThose who are on this path are resolute in purpose, and their aim is
one. O beloved child of the Kurus, the intelligence of those who areirresolute is many-branched.
PURPORTA strong faith in Krsna consciousness that one shall be elevated to the
highest perfection of life is called vyavasayatmika intelligence. TheCaitanya-caritamrta (Madhya 22.62) states:
'sraddha'-sabde----visvasa kahe sudrdha niscaya
krsne bhakti kaile sarva-karma krta haya
Faith means unflinching trust in something sublime. When one is engaged
in the duties of Krsna consciousness, he need not act in relationshipto the material world with obligations to family traditions, humanity,or nationality. Fruitive activities are the engagements of one'sreactions from past good or bad deeds. When one is awake in Krsnaconsciousness, he need no longer endeavor for good results in hisactivities. When one is situated in Krsna consciousness, all activitiesare on the absolute plane, for they are no longer subject to dualitieslike good and bad. The highest perfection of Krsna consciousness isrenunciation of the material conception of life. This state isautomatically achieved by progressive Krsna consciousness. The resolutepurpose of a person in Krsna consciousness is based on knowledge,Vasudevah sarvam iti sa mahatma su-durlabhah, by which one comes toknow perfectly that Vasudeva, or Krsna is the root of all manifestedcauses. As water on the root of a tree is automatically distributed tothe leaves and branches, in Krsna consciousness one can render thehighest service to everyone--namely self, family, society, country,humanity, etc. If Krsna is satisfied by one's actions, then everyonewill be satisfied.Service in Krsna consciousness is, however, best practiced under theable guidance of a spiritual master who is a bona fide representativeof Krsna, who knows the nature of the student and who can guide him toact in Krsna consciousness. As such, to be well-versed in Krsnaconsciousness one has to act firmly and obey the representative ofKrsna, and one should accept the instruction of the bona fide spiritualmaster as one's mission in life. Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakurainstructs us, in his famous prayers for the spiritual master asfollows:
yasya prasadad bhagavat-prasado
yasyaprasadan na gatih kuto 'pidhyayan stuvams tasya yasas tri-sandhyamvande guroh sri-caranaravindam
"By satisfaction of the spiritual master, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead becomes satisfied. And by not satisfying the spiritual master,there is no chance of being promoted to the plane of Krsnaconsciousness. I should, therefore, meditate and pray for his mercythree times a day, and offer my respectful obeisances unto him, myspiritual master."The whole process, however, depends on perfect knowledge of the soulbeyond the conception of the body--not theoretically but practically,when there is no longer a chance for sense gratification manifested infruitive activities. One who is not firmly fixed in mind is diverted byvarious types of fruitive acts.
TEXTS 42-43
yam imam puspitam vacam
pravadanty avipascitahveda-vada-ratah parthananyad astiti vadinah
kamatmanah svarga-para
janma-karma-phala-pradamkriya-visesa-bahulambhogaisvarya-gatim prati
SYNONYMSyam imam--all these; puspitam--flowery; vacam--words; pravadanti--say;
avipascitah--men with a poor fund of knowledge; veda-vada-ratah--supposed followers of the Vedas; partha--O son of Prtha; na--never;anyat--anything else; asti--there is; iti--thus; vadinah--advocates;kama-atmanah--desirous of sense gratification; svarga-parah--aiming toachieve heavenly planets; janma-karma-phala-pradam--resulting infruitive actions, good birth, etc.; kriya-visesa--pompous ceremonies;bahulam--various; bhoga--sense enjoyment; aisvarya--opulence; gatim--progress; prati--towards.
TRANSLATIONMen of small knowledge are very much attached to the flowery words of
the Vedas, which recommend various fruitive activities for elevation toheavenly planets, resultant good birth, power, and so forth. Beingdesirous of sense gratification and opulent life, they say that thereis nothing more than this.
PURPORTPeople in general are not very intelligent, and due to their ignorance
they are most attached to the fruitive activities recommended in thekarma-kanda portions of the Vedas. They do not want anything more thansense gratificatory proposals for enjoying life in heaven, where wineand women are available and material opulence is very common. In theVedas many sacrifices are recommended for elevation to the heavenlyplanets, especially the jyotistoma sacrifices. In fact, it is stated
that anyone desiring elevation to heavenly planets must perform these
sacrifices, and men with a poor fund of knowledge think that this isthe whole purpose of Vedic wisdom. It is very difficult for suchinexperienced persons to be situated in the determined action of Krsnaconsciousness. As fools are attached to the flowers of poisonous treeswithout knowing the results of such attractions, similarlyunenlightened men are attracted by such heavenly opulence and the senseenjoyment thereof.In the karma-kanda section of the Vedas it is said that those whoperform the four monthly penances become eligible to drink the somarasabeverages to become immortal and happy forever. Even on this earth someare very eager to have somarasa to become strong and fit to enjoy sensegratifications. Such persons have no faith in liberation from materialbondage, and they are very much attached to the pompous ceremonies ofVedic sacrifices. They are generally sensual, and they do not wantanything other than the heavenly pleasures of life. It is understoodthat there are gardens called Nandana-kanana in which there is goodopportunity for association with angelic, beautiful women and having aprofuse supply of somarasa wine. Such bodily happiness is certainlysensual; therefore there are those who are purely attached to material,temporary happiness, as lords of the material world.
TEXT 44
bhogaisvarya-prasaktanam
tayapahrta-cetasamvyavasayatmika buddhihsamadhau na vidhiyate
SYNONYMSbhoga--material enjoyment; aisvarya--opulence; prasaktanam--those who
are so attached; taya--by such things; apahrta-cetasam--bewildered inmind; vyavasaya-atmika--fixed determination; buddhih--devotionalservice of the Lord; samadhau--in the controlled mind; na--never;vidhiyate--does take place.
TRANSLATIONIn the minds of those who are too attached to sense enjoyment and
material opulence, and who are bewildered by such things, the resolutedetermination of devotional service to the Supreme Lord does not takeplace.
PURPORTSamadhi means "fixed mind." The Vedic dictionary, the Nirukti, says,
samyag adhiyate 'sminn atma-tattva-yathatmyam: "When the mind is fixedfor understanding the self, it is called samadhi." Samadhi is neverpossible for persons interested in material sense enjoyment, nor forthose who are bewildered by such temporary things. They are more orless condemned by the process of material energy.
TEXT 45
trai-gunya-visaya veda
nistrai-gunyo bhavarjunanirdvandvo nitya-sattva-stho
niryoga-ksema atmavan
SYNONYMStrai-gunya--pertaining to the three modes of material nature; visayah--
on the subject matter; vedah--Vedic literatures; nistrai-gunyah--in apure state of spiritual existence; bhava--be; arjuna--O Arjuna;nirdvandvah--free from the pains of opposites; nitya-sattva-sthah--everremaining in sattva (goodness); niryoga-ksemah--free from (the thoughtof) acquisition and preservation; atma-van--established in the self.
TRANSLATIONThe Vedas mainly deal with the subject of the three modes of material
nature. Rise above these modes, O Arjuna. Be transcendental to all ofthem. Be free from all dualities and from all anxieties for gain andsafety, and be established in the self.
PURPORTAll material activities involve actions and reactions in the three
modes of material nature. They are meant for fruitive results, whichcause bondage in the material world. The Vedas deal mostly withfruitive activities to gradually elevate the general public from thefield of sense gratification to a position on the transcendental plane.Arjuna, as a student and friend of Lord Krsna, is advised to raisehimself to the transcendental position of Vedanta philosophy where, inthe beginning, there is brahma-jijnasa, or questions on the supremetranscendence. All the living entities who are in the material worldare struggling very hard for existence. For them the Lord, aftercreation of the material world, gave the Vedic wisdom advising how tolive and get rid of the material entanglement. When the activities forsense gratification, namely the karma-kanda chapter, are finished, thenthe chance for spiritual realization is offered in the form of theUpanisads, which are part of different Vedas, as the Bhagavad-gita is apart of the fifth Veda, namely the Mahabharata. The Upanisads mark thebeginning of transcendental life.As long as the material body exists, there are actions and reactions inthe material modes. One has to learn tolerance in the face of dualitiessuch as happiness and distress, or cold and warmth, and by toleratingsuch dualities become free from anxieties regarding gain and loss. Thistranscendental position is achieved in full Krsna consciousness whenone is fully dependent on the good will of Krsna.
TEXT 46
yavan artha udapane
sarvatah samplutodaketavan sarvesu vedesubrahmanasya vijanatah
SYNONYMSyavan--all that; arthah--is meant; uda-pane--in a well of water;
sarvatah--in all respects; sampluta-udake--in a great reservoir ofwater; tavan--similarly; sarvesu--in all; vedesu--Vedic literatures;brahmanasya--of the man who knows the Supreme Brahman; vijanatah--ofone who is in complete knowledge.
TRANSLATION
All purposes that are served by the small pond can at once be served by
the great reservoirs of water. Similarly, all the purposes of the Vedascan be served to one who knows the purpose behind them.
PURPORTThe rituals and sacrifices mentioned in the karma-kanda division of the
Vedic literature are to encourage gradual development of self-realization. And the purpose of self-realization is clearly stated inthe Fifteenth Chapter of the Bhagavad-gita (15.15): the purpose ofstudying the Vedas is to know Lord Krsna, the primeval cause ofeverything. So, self-realization means understanding Krsna and one'seternal relationship with Him. The relationship of the living entitieswith Krsna is also mentioned in the Fifteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gita(15.7). The living entities are parts and parcels of Krsna; therefore,revival of Krsna consciousness by the individual living entity is thehighest perfectional stage of Vedic knowledge. This is confirmed in theSrimad-Bhagavatam (3.33.7) as follows:
aho bata sva-paco 'to gariyan
yaj-jihvagre vartate nama tubhyamtepus tapas te juhuvuh sasnur aryabrahmanucur nama grnanti ye te
"O my Lord, a person who is chanting Your holy name, although born of a
low family like that of a candala [dog-eater] is situated on thehighest platform of self-realization. Such a person must have performedall kinds of penances and sacrifices according to Vedic rituals andstudied the Vedic literatures many, many times after taking his bath inall the holy places of pilgrimage. Such a person is considered to bethe best of the Aryan family."So one must be intelligent enough to understand the purpose of theVedas, without being attached to the rituals only, and must not desireto be elevated to the heavenly kingdoms for a better quality of sensegratification. It is not possible for the common man in this age tofollow all the rules and regulations of Vedic rituals and theinjunctions of the Vedanta and the Upanisads. It requires much time,energy, knowledge and resources to execute the purposes of the Vedas.This is hardly possible in this age. The best purpose of Vedic cultureis served, however, by chanting the holy name of the Lord, asrecommended by Lord Caitanya, the deliverer of all fallen souls. WhenLord Caitanya was asked by a great Vedic scholar, PrakasanandaSarasvati, why He, the Lord, was chanting the holy name of the Lordlike a sentimentalist instead of studying Vedanta philosophy, the Lordreplied that His spiritual master found Him to be a great fool and thusasked Him to chant the holy name of Lord Krsna. He did so, and becameecstatic like a madman. In this Age of Kali, most of the population isfoolish and not adequately educated to understand Vedanta philosophy;the best purpose of Vedanta philosophy is served by inoffensivelychanting the holy name of the Lord. Vedanta is the last word in Vedicwisdom, and the author and knower of the Vedanta philosophy is LordKrsna; and the highest Vedantist is the great soul who takes pleasurein chanting the holy name of the Lord. That is the ultimate purpose ofall Vedic mysticism.
TEXT 47
karmany evadhikaras te
ma phalesu kadacanama karma-phala-hetur bhurma te sango 'stv akarmani
SYNONYMSkarmani--prescribed duties; eva--certainly; adhikarah--right; te--of
you; ma--never; phalesu--in the fruits; kadacana--at any time; ma--never; karma-phala--in the result of the work; hetuh--cause; bhuh--become; ma--never; te--of you; sangah--attachment; astu--be there;akarmani--in not doing.
TRANSLATIONYou have a right to perform your prescribed duty, but you are not
entitled to the fruits of action. Never consider yourself to be thecause of the results of your activities, and never be attached to notdoing your duty.
PURPORTThere are three considerations here: prescribed duties, capricious
work, and inaction. Prescribed duties refer to activities performedwhile one is in the modes of material nature. Capricious work meansactions without the sanction of authority, and inaction means notperforming one's prescribed duties. The Lord advised that Arjuna not beinactive, but that he perform his prescribed duty without beingattached to the result. One who is attached to the result of his workis also the cause of the action. Thus he is the enjoyer or sufferer ofthe result of such actions.As far as prescribed duties are concerned, they can be fitted intothree subdivisions, namely routine work, emergency work and desiredactivities. Routine work, in terms of the scriptural injunctions, isdone without desire for results. As one has to do it, obligatory workis action in the mode of goodness. Work with results becomes the causeof bondage; therefore such work is not auspicious. Everyone has hisproprietary right in regard to prescribed duties, but should actwithout attachment to the result; such disinterested obligatory dutiesdoubtlessly lead one to the path of liberation.Arjuna was therefore advised by the Lord to fight as a matter of dutywithout attachment to the result. His nonparticipation in the battle isanother side of attachment. Such attachment never leads one to the pathof salvation. Any attachment, positive or negative, is cause forbondage. Inaction is sinful. Therefore, fighting as a matter of dutywas the only auspicious path of salvation for Arjuna.
TEXT 48
yoga-sthah kuru karmani
sangam tyaktva dhananjayasiddhy-asiddhyoh samo bhutvasamatvam yoga ucyate
SYNONYMS
yoga-sthah--steadfast in yoga; kuru--perform; karmani--your duties;
sangam--attachment; tyaktva--having abandoned; dhananjaya--ODhananjaya; siddhi-asiddhyoh--success and failure; samah--the same;bhutva--having become; samatvam--evenness of mind; yogah--yoga; ucyate--is called.
TRANSLATIONBe steadfast in yoga, O Arjuna. Perform your duty and abandon all
attachment to success or failure. Such evenness of mind is called yoga.
PURPORTKrsna tells Arjuna that he should act in yoga. And what is that yoga?
Yoga means to concentrate the mind upon the Supreme by controlling theever-disturbing senses. And who is the Supreme? The Supreme is theLord. And because He Himself is telling Arjuna to fight, Arjuna hasnothing to do with the results of the fight. Gain or victory areKrsna's concern; Arjuna is simply advised to act according to thedictation of Krsna. The following of Krsna's dictation is real yoga,and this is practiced in the process called Krsna consciousness. ByKrsna consciousness only can one give up the sense of proprietorship.One has to become the servant of Krsna, or the servant of the servantof Krsna. That is the right way to discharge duty in Krsnaconsciousness, which alone can help one to act in yoga.Arjuna is a ksatriya, and as such he is participating in thevarnasrama-dharma institution. It is said in the Visnu Purana that inthe varnasrama-dharma, the whole aim is to satisfy Visnu. No one shouldsatisfy himself, as is the rule in the material world, but one shouldsatisfy Krsna. So, unless one satisfies Krsna, one cannot correctlyobserve the principles of varnasrama-dharma. Indirectly, Arjuna wasadvised to act as Krsna told him.
TEXT 49
durena hy avaram karma
buddhi-yogad dhananjayabuddhau saranam anvicchakrpanah phala-hetavah
SYNONYMSdurena--by discarding it at a long distance; hi--certainly; avaram--
abominable; karma--activities; buddhi-yogat--on the strength of Krsnaconsciousness; dhananjaya--O conqueror of wealth; buddhau--in suchconsciousness; saranam--full surrender; anviccha--desire; krpanah--themisers; phala-hetavah--those desiring fruitive action.
TRANSLATIONO Dhananjaya, rid yourself of all fruitive activities by devotional
service, and surrender fully to that consciousness. Those who want toenjoy the fruits of their work are misers.
PURPORTOne who has actually come to understand one's constitutional position
as an eternal servitor of the Lord gives up all engagements save
working in Krsna consciousness. As already explained, buddhi-yoga means
transcendental loving service to the Lord. Such devotional service isthe right course of action for the living entity. Only misers desire toenjoy the fruit of their own work just to be further entangled inmaterial bondage. Except for work in Krsna consciousness, allactivities are abominable because they continually bind the worker tothe cycle of birth and death. One should therefore never desire to bethe cause of work. Everything should be done in Krsna consciousness,for the satisfaction of Krsna. Misers do not know how to utilize theassets of riches which they acquire by good fortune or by hard labor.One should spend all energies working in Krsna consciousness, and thatwill make one's life successful. Like the misers, unfortunate personsdo not employ their human energy in the service of the Lord.
TEXT 50
buddhi-yukto jahatiha
ubhe sukrta-duskrtetasmad yogaya yujyasvayogah karmasu kausalam
SYNONYMSbuddhi-yuktah--one who is engaged in devotional service; jahati--can
get rid of; iha--in this life; ubhe--in both; sukrta-duskrte--in goodand bad results; tasmat--therefore; yogaya--for the sake of devotionalservice; yujyasva--be so engaged; yogah--Krsna consciousness; karmasu--in all activities; kausalam--art.
TRANSLATIONA man engaged in devotional service rids himself of both good and bad
actions even in this life. Therefore strive for yoga, O Arjuna, whichis the art of all work.
PURPORTSince time immemorial each living entity has accumulated the various
reactions of his good and bad work. As such, he is continuouslyignorant of his real constitutional position. One's ignorance can beremoved by the instruction of the Bhagavad-gita which teaches one tosurrender unto Lord Sri Krsna in all respects and become liberated fromthe chained victimization of action and reaction, birth after birth.Arjuna is therefore advised to act in Krsna consciousness, thepurifying process of resultant action.
TEXT 51
karma-jam buddhi-yukta hi
phalam tyaktva manisinahjanma-bandha-vinirmuktahpadam gacchanty anamayam
SYNONYMSkarma-jam--because of fruitive activities; buddhi-yuktah--being done in
devotional service; hi--certainly; phalam--results; tyaktva--giving up;manisinah--devotees who are great sages; janma-bandha--the bondage of
birth and death; vinirmuktah--liberated soul; padam--position;
gacchanti--reached; anamayam--without miseries.
TRANSLATIONThe wise, engaged in devotional service, take refuge in the Lord, and
free themselves from the cycle of birth and death by renouncing thefruits of action in the material world. In this way they can attainthat state beyond all miseries.
PURPORTThe liberated living entities seek that place where there are no
material miseries. The Bhagavatam (10.14.58) says:
samasrita ye pada-pallava-plavam
mahat-padam punya-yaso murarehbhavambudhir vatsa-padam param padampadam padam yad vipadam na tesam
"For one who has accepted the boat of the lotus feet of the Lord, who
is the shelter of the cosmic manifestation and is famous as Mukunda orthe giver of mukti, the ocean of the material world is like the watercontained in a calf's hoofprint. param padam, or the place where thereare no material miseries, or Vaikuntha, is his goal, not the placewhere there is danger in every step of life."Owing to ignorance, one does not know that this material world is amiserable place where there are dangers at every step. Out of ignoranceonly, less intelligent persons try to adjust to the situation byfruitive activities, thinking that the resultant actions will make themhappy. They do not know that no kind of material body anywhere withinthe universe can give life without miseries. The miseries of life,namely birth, death, old age and diseases, are present everywherewithin the material world. But one who understands his realconstitutional position as the eternal servitor of the Lord, and thusknows the position of the Personality of Godhead, engages himself inthe transcendental loving service of the Lord. Consequently he becomesqualified to enter into the Vaikuntha planets, where there is neithermaterial, miserable life nor the influence of time and death. To knowone's constitutional position means to know also the sublime positionof the Lord. One who wrongly thinks that the living entity's positionand the Lord's position are on the same level is to be understood to bein darkness and therefore unable to engage himself in the devotionalservice of the Lord. He becomes a lord himself and thus paves the wayfor the repetition of birth and death. The one who, understanding thathis position is to serve, transfers himself to the service of the Lord,at once becomes eligible for Vaikunthaloka. Service for the cause ofthe Lord is called karma-yoga or buddhi-yoga, or in plain words,devotional service to the Lord.
TEXT 52
yada te moha-kalilam
buddhir vyatitarisyatitada gantasi nirvedamsrotavyasya srutasya ca
SYNONYMS
yada--when; te--your; moha--illusory; kalilam--dense forest; buddhih--
transcendental service with intelligence; vyatitarisyati--surpasses;tada--at that time; ganta asi--you shall go; nirvedam--callousness;srotavyasya--all that is to be heard; srutasya--all that is alreadyheard; ca--also.
TRANSLATIONWhen your intelligence has passed out of the dense forest of delusion,
you shall become indifferent to all that has been heard and all that isto be heard.
PURPORTThere are many good examples in the lives of the great devotees of the
Lord of those who became indifferent to the rituals of the Vedas simplyby devotional service to the Lord. When a person factually understandsKrsna and his relationship with Krsna, he naturally becomes completelyindifferent to the rituals of fruitive activities, even though anexperienced brahmana. Sri Madhavendra Puri, a great devotee and acaryain the line of the devotees, says:
sandhya-vandana bhadram astu bhavato bhoh snana tubhyam namo
bho devah pitaras ca tarpana-vidhau naham ksamah ksamyatamyatra kvapi nisadya yadava-kulottamasya kamsa-dvisahsmaram smaram agham harami tad alam manye kim anyena me
"O Lord, in my prayers three times a day, all glory to you. Bathing, I
offer my obeisances unto you. O demigods! O forefathers! Please excuseme for my inability to offer you my respects. Now wherever I sit, I canremember the great descendant of the Yadu dynasty [Krsna], the enemy ofKamsa, and thereby I can free myself from all sinful bondage. I thinkthis is sufficient for me."The Vedic rites and rituals are imperative for neophytes: comprehendingall kinds of prayer three times a day, taking a bath early in themorning, offering respects to the forefathers, etc. But, when one isfully in Krsna consciousness and is engaged in His transcendentalloving service, one becomes indifferent to all these regulativeprinciples because he has already attained perfection. If one can reachthe platform of understanding by service to the Supreme Lord Krsna, hehas no longer to execute different types of penances and sacrifices asrecommended in revealed scriptures. And, similarly, if one has notunderstood that the purpose of the Vedas is to reach Krsna and simplyengages in the rituals, etc., then he is uselessly wasting time in suchengagements. Persons in Krsna consciousness transcend the limit ofsabda-brahma, or the range of the Vedas and Upanisads.
TEXT 53
sruti-vipratipanna te
yada sthasyati niscalasamadhav acala buddhistada yogam avapsyasi
SYNONYMS
sruti--Vedic revelation; vipratipanna--without being influenced by the
fruitive results of the Vedas; te--your; yada--when; sthasyati--remains; niscala--unmoved; samadhau--in transcendental consciousness,or Krsna consciousness; acala--unflinching; buddhih--intelligence;tada--at that time; yogam--self-realization; avapsyasi--you willachieve.
TRANSLATIONWhen your mind is no longer disturbed by the flowery language of the
Vedas, and when it remains fixed in the trance of self-realization,then you will have attained the divine consciousness.
PURPORTTo say that one is in samadhi is to say that one has fully realized
Krsna consciousness; that is, one in full samadhi has realized Brahman,Paramatma and Bhagavan. The highest perfection of self-realization isto understand that one is eternally the servitor of Krsna and thatone's only business is to discharge one's duties in Krsnaconsciousness. A Krsna conscious person, or unflinching devotee of theLord, should not be disturbed by the flowery language of the Vedas norbe engaged in fruitive activities for promotion to the heavenlykingdom. In Krsna consciousness, one comes directly into communion withKrsna, and thus all directions from Krsna may be understood in thattranscendental state. One is sure to achieve results by such activitiesand attain conclusive knowledge. One has only to carry out the ordersof Krsna or His representative, the spiritual master.
TEXT 54
arjuna uvaca
sthita-prajnasya ka bhasasamadhi-sthasya kesavasthita-dhih kim prabhasetakim asita vrajeta kim
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; sthita-prajnasya--of one who is situated in
fixed Krsna consciousness; ka--what; bhasa--language; samadhi-sthasya--of one situated in trance; kesava--O Krsna; sthita-dhih--one fixed inKrsna consciousness; kim--what; prabhaseta--speak; kim--how; asita--does remain; vrajeta--walks; kim--how.
TRANSLATIONArjuna said: O Krsna, what are the symptoms of one whose consciousness
is thus merged in transcendence? How does he speak, and what is hislanguage? How does he sit, and how does he walk?
PURPORTAs there are symptoms for each and every man, in terms of his
particular situation, similarly one who is Krsna conscious has hisparticular nature--talking, walking, thinking, feeling, etc. As a richman has his symptoms by which he is known as a rich man, as a diseasedman has his symptoms, by which he is known as diseased, or as a learned
man has his symptoms, so a man in transcendental consciousness of Krsna
has specific symptoms in various dealings. One can know his specificsymptoms from the Bhagavad-gita. Most important is how the man in Krsnaconsciousness speaks, for speech is the most important quality of anyman. It is said that a fool is undiscovered as long as he does notspeak, and certainly a well-dressed fool cannot be identified unless hespeaks, but as soon as he speaks, he reveals himself at once. Theimmediate symptom of a Krsna conscious man is that he speaks only ofKrsna and of matters relating to Him. Other symptoms then automaticallyfollow, as stated below.
TEXT 55
sri-bhagavan uvaca
prajahati yada kamansarvan partha mano-gatanatmany evatmana tustahsthita-prajnas tadocyate
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; prajahati-
-gives up; yada--when; kaman--desires for sense gratification; sarvan--of all varieties; partha--O son of Prtha; manah-gatan--of mentalconcoction; atmani--in the pure state of the soul; eva--certainly;atmana--by the purified mind; tustah--satisfied; sthita-prajnah--transcendentally situated; tada--at that time; ucyate--is said.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: O Partha, when a man gives up all varieties of
sense desire which arise from mental concoction, and when his mindfinds satisfaction in the self alone, then he is said to be in puretranscendental consciousness.
PURPORTThe Bhagavatam affirms that any person who is fully in Krsna
consciousness, or devotional service of the Lord, has all the goodqualities of the great sages, whereas a person who is not sotranscendentally situated has no good qualifications, because he issure to be taking refuge in his own mental concoctions. Consequently,it is rightly said herein that one has to give up all kinds of sensedesire manufactured by mental concoction. Artificially, such sensedesires cannot be stopped. But if one is engaged in Krsnaconsciousness, then, automatically, sense desires subside withoutextraneous efforts. Therefore, one has to engage himself in Krsnaconsciousness without hesitation, for this devotional service willinstantly help one onto the platform of transcendental consciousness.The highly developed soul always remains satisfied in himself byrealizing himself as the eternal servitor of the Supreme Lord. Such atranscendentally situated person has no sense desires resulting frompetty materialism; rather, he remains always happy in his naturalposition of eternally serving the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 56
duhkhesv anudvigna-manah
sukhesu vigata-sprhah
vita-raga-bhaya-krodhahsthita-dhir munir ucyate
SYNONYMSduhkhesu--in the threefold miseries; anudvigna-manah--without being
agitated in mind; sukhesu--in happiness; vigata-sprhah--without beingtoo interested; vita--free from; raga--attachment; bhaya--fear;krodhah--anger; sthita-dhih--one who is steady; munih--a sage; ucyate--is called.
TRANSLATIONOne who is not disturbed in spite of the threefold miseries, who is not
elated when there is happiness, and who is free from attachment, fearand anger, is called a sage of steady mind.
PURPORTThe word muni means one who can agitate his mind in various ways for
mental speculation without coming to a factual conclusion. It is saidthat every muni has a different angle of vision, and unless a munidiffers from other munis, he cannot be called a muni in the strictsense of the term. Nasav rsir yasya matam na bhinnam (Mahabharata,Vana-parva 313.117). But a sthita-dhir muni, as mentioned herein by theLord, is different from an ordinary muni. The sthita-dhir muni isalways in Krsna consciousness, for he has exhausted all his business ofcreative speculation. He has surpassed the stage of mental speculationsand has come to the conclusion that Lord Sri Krsna, or Vasudeva, iseverything (vasudevah sarvam iti sa mahatma su-durlabhah). He is calleda muni fixed in mind. Such a fully Krsna conscious person is not at alldisturbed by the onslaughts of the threefold miseries, for he acceptsall miseries as the mercy of the Lord, thinking himself only worthy ofmore trouble due to his past misdeeds; and he sees that his miseries,by the grace of the Lord, are minimized to the lowest. Similarly, whenhe is happy he gives credit to the Lord, thinking himself unworthy ofthe happiness; he realizes that it is due only to the Lord's grace thathe is in such a comfortable condition and able to render better serviceto the Lord. And, for the service of the Lord, he is always daring andactive and is not influenced by attachment or aversion. Attachmentmeans accepting things for one's own sense gratification, anddetachment is the absence of such sensual attachment. But one fixed inKrsna consciousness has neither attachment nor detachment because hislife is dedicated in the service of the Lord. Consequently he is not atall angry even when his attempts are unsuccessful. A Krsna consciousperson is always steady in his determination.
TEXT 57
yah sarvatranabhisnehas
tat tat prapya subhasubhamnabhinandati na dvestitasya prajna pratisthita
SYNONYMS
yah--one who; sarvatra--everywhere; anabhisnehah--without affection;
tat--that; tat--that; prapya--achieving; subha--good; asubham--evil;na--never; abhinandati--praise; na--never; dvesti--envies; tasya--his;prajna--perfect knowledge; pratisthita--fixed.
TRANSLATIONHe who is without attachment, who does not rejoice when he obtains
good, nor lament when he obtains evil, is firmly fixed in perfectknowledge.
PURPORTThere is always some upheaval in the material world which may be good
or evil. One who is not agitated by such material upheavals, who isunaffected by good and evil, is to be understood to be fixed in Krsnaconsciousness. As long as one is in the material world there is alwaysthe possibility of good and evil because this world is full of duality.But one who is fixed in Krsna consciousness is not affected by good andevil, because he is simply concerned with Krsna, who is all-goodabsolute. Such consciousness in Krsna situates one in a perfecttranscendental position called, technically, samadhi.
TEXT 58
yada samharate cayam
kurmo 'nganiva sarvasahindriyanindriyarthebhyastasya prajna pratisthita
SYNONYMSyada--when; samharate--winds up; ca--also; ayam--all these; kurmah--
tortoise; angani--limbs; iva--like; sarvasah--altogether; indriyani--senses; indriya-arthebhyah--from the sense objects; tasya--his; prajna--consciousness; pratisthita--fixed up.
TRANSLATIONOne who is able to withdraw his senses from sense objects, as the
tortoise draws its limbs within the shell, is to be understood as trulysituated in knowledge.
PURPORTThe test of a yogi, devotee, or self-realized soul is that he is able
to control the senses according to his plan. Most people, however, areservants of the senses and are thus directed by the dictation of thesenses. That is the answer to the question as to how the yogi issituated. The senses are compared to venomous serpents. They want toact very loosely and without restriction. The yogi, or the devotee,must be very strong to control the serpents--like a snake charmer. Henever allows them to act independently. There are many injunctions inthe revealed scriptures; some of them are do-not's, and some of themare do's. Unless one is able to follow the do's and the do-not's,restricting oneself from sense enjoyment, it is not possible to befirmly fixed in Krsna consciousness. The best example, set herein, isthe tortoise. The tortoise can at any moment wind up his senses and
exhibit them again at any time for particular purposes. Similarly, the
senses of the Krsna conscious persons are used only for some particularpurpose in the service of the Lord and are withdrawn otherwise. Keepingthe senses always in the service of the Lord is the example set by theanalogy of the tortoise, who keeps the senses within.
TEXT 59
visaya vinivartante
niraharasya dehinahrasa-varjam raso 'py asyaparam drstva nivartate
SYNONYMSvisayah--objects for sense enjoyment; vinivartante--are practiced to be
refrained from; niraharasya--by negative restrictions; dehinah--for theembodied; rasa-varjam--giving up the taste; rasah--sense of enjoyment;api--although there is; asya--his; param--far superior things; drstva--by experiencing; nivartate--ceases from.
TRANSLATIONThe embodied soul may be restricted from sense enjoyment, though the
taste for sense objects remains. But, ceasing such engagements byexperiencing a higher taste, he is fixed in consciousness.
PURPORTUnless one is transcendentally situated, it is not possible to cease
from sense enjoyment. The process of restriction from sense enjoymentby rules and regulations is something like restricting a diseasedperson from certain types of eatables. The patient, however, neitherlikes such restrictions nor loses his taste for eatables. Similarly,sense restriction by some spiritual process like astanga-yoga, in thematter of yama, niyama, asana, pranayama, pratyahara, dharana, dhyana,etc., is recommended for less intelligent persons who have no betterknowledge. But one who has tasted the beauty of the Supreme Lord Krsna,in the course of his advancement in Krsna consciousness, no longer hasa taste for dead material things. Therefore, restrictions are there forthe less intelligent neophytes in the spiritual advancement of life,but such restrictions are only good if one actually has a taste forKrsna consciousness. When one is actually Krsna conscious, heautomatically loses his taste for pale things.
TEXT 60
yatato hy api kaunteya
purusasya vipascitahindriyani pramathiniharanti prasabham manah
SYNONYMSyatatah--while endeavoring; hi--certainly; api--in spite of; kaunteya--
O son of Kunti; purusasya--of the man; vipascitah--full ofdiscriminating knowledge; indriyani--the senses; pramathini--
stimulated; haranti--throws forcefully; prasabham--by force; manah--the
mind.
TRANSLATIONThe senses are so strong and impetuous, O Arjuna, that they forcibly
carry away the mind even of a man of discrimination who is endeavoringto control them.
PURPORTThere are many learned sages, philosophers and transcendentalists who
try to conquer the senses, but in spite of their endeavors, even thegreatest of them sometimes fall victim to material sense enjoyment dueto the agitated mind. Even Visvamitra, a great sage and perfect yogi,was misled by Menaka into sex enjoyment, although the yogi wasendeavoring for sense control with severe types of penance and yogapractice. And, of course, there are so many similar instances in thehistory of the world. Therefore, it is very difficult to control themind and senses without being fully Krsna conscious. Without engagingthe mind in Krsna, one cannot cease such material engagements. Apractical example is given by Sri Yamunacarya, a great saint anddevotee, who says:
yad-avadhi mama cetah krsna-padaravinde
nava-nava-rasa-dhamany udyatam rantum asittad-avadhi bata nari-sangame smaryamanebhavati mukha-vikarah susthu nisthivanam ca
"Since my mind has been engaged in the service of the lotus feet of
Lord Krsna, and I have been enjoying an ever new transcendental humor,whenever I think of sex life with a woman, my face at once turns fromit, and I spit at the thought."Krsna consciousness is such a transcendentally nice thing thatautomatically material enjoyment becomes distasteful. It is as if ahungry man had satisfied his hunger by a sufficient quantity ofnutritious eatables. Maharaja Ambarisa also conquered a great yogi,Durvasa Muni, simply because his mind was engaged in Krsnaconsciousness (sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayor vacamsi vaikuntha-gunanuvarnane).
TEXT 61
tani sarvani samyamya
yukta asita mat-parahvase hi yasyendriyanitasya prajna pratisthita
SYNONYMStani--those senses; sarvani--all; samyamya--keeping under control;
yuktah--being engaged; asita--being so situated; mat-parah--inrelationship with Me; vase--in full subjugation; hi--certainly; yasya--one whose; indriyani--senses; tasya--his; prajna--consciousness;pratisthita--fixed.
TRANSLATION
One who restrains his senses and fixes his consciousness upon Me, is
known as a man of steady intelligence.
PURPORTThat the highest conception of yoga perfection is Krsna consciousness
is clearly explained in this verse. And, unless one is Krsna conscious,it is not at all possible to control the senses. As cited above, thegreat sage Durvasa Muni picked a quarrel with Maharaja Ambarisa, andDurvasa Muni unnecessarily became angry out of pride and thereforecould not check his senses. On the other hand, the king, although notas powerful a yogi as the sage, but a devotee of the Lord, silentlytolerated all the sage's injustices and thereby emerged victorious. Theking was able to control his senses because of the followingqualifications, as mentioned in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (9.4.18-20):
sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayor
vacamsi vaikuntha-gunanuvarnanekarau harer mandira-marjanadisusrutim cakaracyuta-sat-kathodaye
mukunda-lingalaya-darsane drsau
tad-bhrtya-gatra-sparse 'nga-sangamamghranam ca tat-pada-saroja-saurabhesrimat-tulasya rasanam tad-arpite
padau hareh ksetra-padanusarpane
siro hrsikesa-padabhivandanekamam ca dasye na tu kama-kamyayayathottama-sloka-janasraya ratih
"King Ambarisa fixed his mind on the lotus feet of Lord Krsna, engaged
his words in describing the abode of the Lord, his hands in cleansingthe temple of the Lord, his ears in hearing the pastimes of the Lord,his eyes in seeing the form of the Lord, his body in touching the bodyof the devotee, his nostrils in smelling the flavor of the flowersoffered to the lotus feet of the Lord, his tongue in tasting the tulasileaves offered to Him, his legs in traveling to the holy place whereHis temple is situated, his head in offering obeisances unto the Lord,and his desires in fulfilling the desires of the Lord... and all thesequalifications made him fit to become a mat-para devotee of the Lord."The word mat-para is most significant in this connection. How one canbecome mat-para is described in the life of Maharaja Ambarisa. SrilaBaladeva Vidyabhusana, a great scholar and acarya in the line of themat-para, remarks: mad-bhakti-prabhavena sarvendriya-vijaya-purvikasvatma-drstih sulabheti bhavah. "The senses can be completelycontrolled only by the strength of devotional service to Krsna." Also,the example of fire is sometimes given: "As the small flames withinburn everything within the room, similarly Lord Visnu, situated in theheart of the yogi, burns up all kinds of impurities." The Yoga-sutraalso prescribes meditation on Visnu, and not meditation on the void.The so-called yogis who meditate on something which is not the Visnuform simply waste their time in a vain search after somephantasmagoria. We have to be Krsna conscious--devoted to thePersonality of Godhead. This is the aim of the real yoga.
TEXT 62
dhyayato visayan pumsah
sangas tesupajayatesangat sanjayate kamahkamat krodho 'bhijayate
SYNONYMSdhyayatah--while contemplating; visayan--sense objects; pumsah--of the
person; sangah--attachment; tesu--in the sense objects; upajayate--develops; sangat--attachment; sanjayate--develops; kamah--desire;kamat--from desire; krodhah--anger; abhijayate--becomes manifest.
TRANSLATIONWhile contemplating the objects of the senses, a person develops
attachment for them, and from such attachment lust develops, and fromlust anger arises.
PURPORTOne who is not Krsna conscious is subjected to material desires while
contemplating the objects of the senses. The senses require realengagements, and if they are not engaged in the transcendental lovingservice of the Lord, they will certainly seek engagement in the serviceof materialism. In the material world everyone, including Lord Siva andLord Brahma--to say nothing of other demigods in the heavenly planets--is subjected to the influence of sense objects, and the only method toget out of this puzzle of material existence is to become Krsnaconscious. Lord Siva was deep in meditation, but when Parvati agitatedhim for sense pleasure, he agreed to the proposal, and as a resultKartikeya was born. When Haridasa Thakura was a young devotee of theLord, he was similarly allured by the incarnation of Maya-devi, butHaridasa easily passed the test because of his unalloyed devotion toLord Krsna. As illustrated in the above-mentioned verse of SriYamunacarya, a sincere devotee of the Lord shuns all material senseenjoyment due to his higher taste for spiritual enjoyment in theassociation of the Lord. That is the secret of success. One who is not,therefore, in Krsna consciousness, however powerful he may be incontrolling the senses by artificial repression, is sure ultimately tofail, for the slightest thought of sense pleasure will agitate him togratify his desires.
TEXT 63
krodhad bhavati sammohah
sammohat smrti-vibhramahsmrti-bhramsad buddhi-nasobuddhi-nasat pranasyati
SYNONYMSkrodhat--from anger; bhavati--takes place; sammohah--perfect illusion;
sammohat--from illusion; smrti--of memory; vibhramah--bewilderment;smrti-bhramsat--after bewilderment of memory; buddhi-nasah--loss ofintelligence; buddhi-nasat--and from loss of intelligence; pranasyati--falls down.
TRANSLATION
From anger, delusion arises, and from delusion bewilderment of memory.
When the memory is bewildered, intelligence is lost, and whenintelligence is lost, one falls down again into the material pool.
PURPORTBy development of Krsna consciousness one can know that everything has
its use in the service of the Lord. Those who are without knowledge ofKrsna consciousness artificially try to avoid material objects, and asa result, although they desire liberation from material bondage, theydo not attain to the perfect stage of renunciation. On the other hand,a person in Krsna consciousness knows how to use everything in theservice of the Lord; therefore he does not become a victim of materialconsciousness. For example, for an impersonalist, the Lord, or theAbsolute, being impersonal, cannot eat. Whereas an impersonalist triesto avoid good eatables, a devotee knows that Krsna is the supremeenjoyer and that He eats all that is offered to Him in devotion. So,after offering good eatables to the Lord, the devotee takes theremnants, called prasadam. Thus everything becomes spiritualized andthere is no danger of a downfall. The devotee takes prasadam in Krsnaconsciousness, whereas the nondevotee rejects it as material. Theimpersonalist, therefore, cannot enjoy life due to his artificialrenunciation; and for this reason, a slight agitation of the mind pullshim down again into the pool of material existence. It is said thatsuch a soul, even though rising up to the point of liberation, fallsdown again due to his not having support in devotional service.
TEXT 64
raga-dvesa-vimuktais tu
visayan indriyais caranatma-vasyair vidheyatmaprasadam adhigacchati
SYNONYMSraga--attachment; dvesa--detachment; vimuktaih--by one who has been
free from such things; tu--but; visayan--sense objects; indriyaih--bythe senses; caran--acting; atma-vasyaih--one who has control over;vidheya-atma--one who follows regulated freedom; prasadam--the mercy ofthe Lord; adhigacchati--attains.
TRANSLATIONOne who can control his senses by practicing the regulative principles
of freedom can obtain the complete mercy of the Lord and thus becomefree from all attachment and aversion.
PURPORTIt is already explained that one may externally control the senses by
some artificial process, but unless the senses are engaged in thetranscendental service of the Lord, there is every chance of a fall.Although the person in full Krsna consciousness may apparently be onthe sensual plane, because of his being Krsna conscious, he has noattachment to sensual activities. The Krsna conscious person isconcerned only with the satisfaction of Krsna, and nothing else.
Therefore he is transcendental to all attachment. If Krsna wants, the
devotee can do anything which is ordinarily undesirable; and if Krsnadoes not want, he shall not do that which he would have ordinarily donefor his own satisfaction. Therefore to act or not to act is within hiscontrol because he acts only under the direction of Krsna. Thisconsciousness is the causeless mercy of the Lord, which the devotee canachieve in spite of his being attached to the sensual platform.
TEXT 65
prasade sarva-duhkhanam
hanir asyopajayateprasanna-cetaso hy asubuddhih paryavatisthate
SYNONYMSprasade--on achievement of the causeless mercy of the Lord; sarva--of
all; duhkhanam--material miseries; hanih--destruction; asya--his;upajayate--takes place; prasanna-cetasah--of the happy-minded; hi--certainly; asu--very soon; buddhih--intelligence; pari--sufficiently;avatisthate--established.
TRANSLATIONFor one who is so situated in the Divine consciousness, the threefold
miseries of material existence exist no longer; in such a happy state,one's intelligence soon becomes steady.
TEXT 66
nasti buddhir ayuktasya
na cayuktasya bhavanana cabhavayatah santirasantasya kutah sukham
SYNONYMSna asti--there cannot be; buddhih--transcendental intelligence;
ayuktasya--of one who is not connected (with Krsna consciousness); na--neither; ca--and; ayuktasya--of one devoid of Krsna consciousness;bhavana--mind fixed in happiness; na--neither; ca--and; abhavayatah--one who is not fixed; santih--peace; asantasya--of the unpeaceful;kutah--where is; sukham--happiness.
TRANSLATIONOne who is not in transcendental consciousness can have neither a
controlled mind nor steady intelligence, without which there is nopossibility of peace. And how can there be any happiness without peace?
PURPORTUnless one is in Krsna consciousness there is no possibility of peace.
So it is confirmed in the Fifth Chapter (5.29) that when oneunderstands that Krsna is the only enjoyer of all the good results ofsacrifice and penance, and that He is the proprietor of all universalmanifestations, that He is the real friend of all living entities, then
only can one have real peace. Therefore, if one is not in Krsna
consciousness, there cannot be a final goal for the mind. Disturbanceis due to want of an ultimate goal, and when one is certain that Krsnais the enjoyer, proprietor and friend of everyone and everything, thenone can, with a steady mind, bring about peace. Therefore, one who isengaged without a relationship with Krsna is certainly always indistress and is without peace, however much he may make a show of peaceand spiritual advancement in life. Krsna consciousness is a self-manifested peaceful condition which can be achieved only inrelationship with Krsna.
TEXT 67
indriyanam hi caratam
yan mano 'nuvidhiyatetad asya harati prajnamvayur navam ivambhasi
SYNONYMSindriyanam--of the senses; hi--certainly; caratam--while herding over;
yat--that; manah--mind; anuvidhiyate--becomes constantly engaged; tat--that; asya--his; harati--takes away; prajnam--intelligence; vayuh--wind; navam--a boat; iva--like; ambhasi--on the water.
TRANSLATIONAs a boat on the water is swept away by a strong wind, even one of the
senses on which the mind focuses can carry away a man's intelligence.
PURPORTUnless all of the senses are engaged in the service of the Lord, even
one of them engaged in sense gratification can deviate the devotee fromthe path of transcendental advancement. As mentioned in the life ofMaharaja Ambarisa, all of the senses must be engaged in Krsnaconsciousness, for that is the correct technique for controlling themind.
TEXT 68
tasmad yasya maha-baho
nigrhitani sarvasahindriyanindriyarthebhyastasya prajna pratisthita
SYNONYMStasmat--therefore; yasya--of one's; maha-baho--O mighty-armed one;
nigrhitani--so curbed down; sarvasah--all around; indriyani--thesenses; indriya-arthebhyah--for the sake of sense objects; tasya--his;prajna--intelligence; pratisthita--fixed.
TRANSLATIONTherefore, O mighty-armed, one whose senses are restrained from their
objects is certainly of steady intelligence.
PURPORT
As enemies are curbed by superior force, similarly the senses, can be
curbed not by any human endeavor, but only by keeping them engaged inthe service of the Lord. One who has understood this--that only byKrsna consciousness is one really established in intelligence and thatone should practice this art under the guidance of a bona fidespiritual master--is called sadhaka, or a suitable candidate forliberation.
TEXT 69
ya nisa sarva-bhutanam
tasyam jagarti samyamiyasyam jagrati bhutanisa nisa pasyato muneh
SYNONYMSya--what; nisa--is night; sarva--all; bhutanam--of living entities;
tasyam--in that; jagarti--wakeful; samyami--the self-controlled;yasyam--in which; jagrati--awake; bhutani--all beings; sa--that is;nisa--night; pasyatah--for the introspective; muneh--sage.
TRANSLATIONWhat is night for all beings is the time of awakening for the self-
controlled; and the time of awakening for all beings is night for theintrospective sage.
PURPORTThere are two classes of intelligent men. The one is intelligent in
material activities for sense gratification, and the other isintrospective and awake to the cultivation of self-realization.Activities of the introspective sage, or thoughtful man, are night forpersons materially absorbed. Materialistic persons remain asleep insuch a night due to their ignorance of self-realization. Theintrospective sage remains alert in the "night" of the materialisticmen. The sage feels transcendental pleasure in the gradual advancementof spiritual culture, whereas the man in materialistic activities,being asleep to self-realization, dreams of varieties of sensepleasure, feeling sometimes happy and sometimes distressed in hissleeping condition. The introspective man is always indifferent tomaterialistic happiness and distress. He goes on with his self-realization activities undisturbed by material reactions.
TEXT 70
apuryamanam acala-pratistham
samudram apah pravisanti yadvattadvat kama yam pravisanti sarvesa santim apnoti na kama-kami
SYNONYMSapuryamanam--always filled; acala-pratistham--steadily situated;
samudram--the ocean; apah--water; pravisanti--enter; yadvat--as;
tadvat--so; kamah--desires; yam--unto one; pravisanti--enter; sarve--
all; sah--that person; santim--peace; apnoti--achieves; na--not; kama-kami--one who desires to fulfill desires.
TRANSLATIONA person who is not disturbed by the incessant flow of desires--that
enter like rivers into the ocean which is ever being filled but isalways still--can alone achieve peace, and not the man who strives tosatisfy such desires.
PURPORTAlthough the vast ocean is always filled with water, it is always,
especially during the rainy season, being filled with much more water.But the ocean remains the same--steady; it is not agitated, nor does itcross beyond the limit of its brink. That is also true of a personfixed in Krsna consciousness. As long as one has the material body, thedemands of the body for sense gratification will continue. The devotee,however, is not in need of anything because the Lord fulfills all hismaterial necessities. Therefore he is like the ocean--always full inhimself. Desires may come to him like the waters of the rivers thatflow into the ocean, but he is steady in his activities, and he is noteven slightly disturbed by desires for sense gratification. That is theproof of a Krsna conscious man--one who has lost all inclinations formaterial sense gratification, although the desires are present. Becausehe remains satisfied in the transcendental loving service of the Lord,he can remain steady, like the ocean, and therefore enjoy full peace.Others, however, who fulfill desires even up to the limit ofliberation, what to speak of material success, never attain peace. Thefruitive workers, the salvationists, and also the yogis who are aftermystic powers, are all unhappy because of unfulfilled desires. But theperson in Krsna consciousness is happy in the service of the Lord, andhe has no desires to be fulfilled. In fact, he does not even desireliberation from the so-called material bondage. The devotees of Krsnahave no material desires, and therefore they are in perfect peace.
TEXT 71
vihaya kaman yah sarvan
pumams carati nihsprhahnirmamo nirahankarahsa santim adhigacchati
SYNONYMSvihaya--after giving up; kaman--all material desires for sense
gratification; yah--the person; sarvan--all; puman--a person; carati--lives; nihsprhah--desireless; nirmamah--without a sense ofproprietorship; nirahankarah--without false ego; sah--all; santim--perfect peace; adhigacchati--attains.
TRANSLATIONA person who has given up all desires for sense gratification, who
lives free from desires, who has given up all sense of proprietorshipand is devoid of false ego--he alone can attain real peace.
PURPORT
To become desireless means not to desire anything for sense
gratification. In other words, desire for becoming Krsna conscious isactually desirelessness. To understand one's actual position as theeternal servitor of Krsna, without falsely claiming this material bodyto be oneself and without falsely claiming proprietorship over anythingin the world, is the perfect stage of Krsna consciousness. One who issituated in this perfect stage knows that because Krsna is theproprietor of everything, therefore everything must be used for thesatisfaction of Krsna. Arjuna did not want to fight for his own sensesatisfaction, but when he became fully Krsna conscious he foughtbecause Krsna wanted him to fight. For himself there was no desire tofight, but for Krsna the same Arjuna fought to his best ability. Desirefor the satisfaction of Krsna is really desirelessness; it is not anartificial attempt to abolish desires. The living entity cannot bedesireless or senseless, but he does have to change the quality of thedesires. A materially desireless person certainly knows that everythingbelongs to Krsna (isavasyam idam sarvam), and therefore he does notfalsely claim proprietorship over anything. This transcendentalknowledge is based on self-realization--namely, knowing perfectly wellthat every living entity is the eternal part and parcel of Krsna inspiritual identity, and therefore the eternal position of the livingentity is never on the level of Krsna or greater than Him. Thisunderstanding of Krsna consciousness is the basic principle of realpeace.
TEXT 72
esa brahmi sthitih partha
nainam prapya vimuhyatisthitvasyam anta-kale 'pibrahma-nirvanam rcchati
SYNONYMSesa--this; brahmi--spiritual; sthitih--situation; partha--O son of
Prtha; na--never; enam--this; prapya--achieving; vimuhyati--bewilders;sthitva--being so situated; asyam--being so; anta-kale--at the end oflife; api--also; brahma-nirvanam--spiritual (kingdom of God); rcchati--attains.
TRANSLATIONThat is the way of the spiritual and godly life, after attaining which
a man is not bewildered. Being so situated even at the hour of death,one can enter into the kingdom of God.
PURPORTOne can attain Krsna consciousness or divine life at once, within a
second--or one may not attain such a state of life even after millionsof births. It is only a matter of understanding and accepting the fact.Khatvanga Maharaja attained this state of life just a few minutesbefore his death, by surrendering unto Krsna. Nirvana means ending theprocess of materialistic life. According to Buddhist philosophy, thereis only void after the completion of this material life, but Bhagavad-gita teaches differently. Actual life begins after the completion of
this material life. For the gross materialist it is sufficient to know
that one has to end this materialistic way of life, but for persons whoare spiritually advanced, there is another life after thismaterialistic life. Before ending this life, if one fortunately becomesKrsna conscious, he at once attains the stage of brahma-nirvana. Thereis no difference between the kingdom of God and the devotional serviceof the Lord. Since both of them are on the absolute plane, to beengaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord is to haveattained the spiritual kingdom. In the material world there areactivities of sense gratification, whereas in the spiritual world thereare activities of Krsna consciousness. Attainment of Krsnaconsciousness even during this life is immediate attainment of Brahman,and one who is situated in Krsna consciousness has certainly alreadyentered into the kingdom of God.Brahman is just the opposite of matter. Therefore brahmi sthiti means"not on the platform of material activities." Devotional service of theLord is accepted in the Bhagavad-gita as the liberated stage (sa gunansamatityaitan brahma-bhuyaya kalpate). Therefore, brahmi sthiti isliberation from material bondage.Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura has summarized this Second Chapter of theBhagavad-gita as being the contents for the whole text. In theBhagavad-gita, the subject matters are karma-yoga, jnana-yoga, andbhakti-yoga. In the Second Chapter karma-yoga and jnana-yoga have beenclearly discussed, and a glimpse of bhakti-yoga has also been given, asthe contents for the complete text.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Second Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of its Contents.
Chapter 3
Karma-yoga
TEXT 1
arjuna uvaca
jyayasi cet karmanas temata buddhir janardanatat kim karmani ghore mamniyojayasi kesava
SYNONYMSarjunah--Arjuna; uvaca--said; jyayasi--speaking very highly; cet--
although; karmanah--than fruitive action; te--Your; mata--opinion;buddhih--intelligence; janardana--O Krsna; tat--therefore; kim--why;karmani--in action; ghore--ghastly; mam--me; niyojayasi--engaging me;kesava--O Krsna.
TRANSLATIONArjuna said: O Janardana, O Kesava, why do You urge me to engage in
this ghastly warfare, if You think that intelligence is better thanfruitive work?
PURPORTThe Supreme Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna has very elaborately
described the constitution of the soul in the previous chapter, with a
view to deliver His intimate friend Arjuna from the ocean of material
grief. And the path of realization has been recommended: buddhi-yoga,or Krsna consciousness. Sometimes Krsna consciousness is misunderstoodto be inertia, and one with such a misunderstanding often withdraws toa secluded place to become fully Krsna conscious by chanting the holyname of Lord Krsna. But without being trained in the philosophy ofKrsna consciousness, it is not advisable to chant the holy name ofKrsna in a secluded place, where one may acquire only cheap adorationfrom the innocent public. Arjuna also thought of Krsna consciousness orbuddhi-yoga, or intelligence in spiritual advancement of knowledge, assomething like retirement from active life and the practice of penanceand austerity at a secluded place. In other words, he wanted toskillfully avoid the fighting by using Krsna consciousness as anexcuse. But as a sincere student, he placed the matter before hismaster and questioned Krsna as to his best course of action. In answer,Lord Krsna elaborately explained karma-yoga, or work in Krsnaconsciousness, in this Third Chapter.
TEXT 2
vyamisreneva vakyena
buddhim mohayasiva metad ekam vada niscityayena sreyo 'ham apnuyam
SYNONYMSvyamisrena--by equivocal; iva--as; vakyena--words; buddhim--
intelligence; mohayasi--bewildering; iva--as; me--my; tat--therefore;ekam--only one; vada--please tell; niscitya--ascertaining; yena--bywhich; sreyah--real benefit; aham--I; apnuyam--may have it.
TRANSLATIONMy intelligence is bewildered by Your equivocal instructions.
Therefore, please tell me decisively what is most beneficial for me.
PURPORTIn the previous chapter, as a prelude to the Bhagavad-gita, many
different paths were explained, such as sankhya-yoga, buddhi-yoga,control of the senses by intelligence, work without fruitive desire,and the position of the neophyte. This was all presentedunsystematically. A more organized outline of the path would benecessary for action and understanding. Arjuna, therefore, wanted toclear up these apparently confusing matters so that any common mancould accept them without misinterpretation. Although Krsna had nointention of confusing Arjuna by any jugglery of words, Arjuna couldnot follow the process of Krsna consciousness--either by inertia oractive service. In other words, by his questions he is clearing thepath of Krsna consciousness for all students who seriously want tounderstand the mystery of the Bhagavad-gita.
TEXT 3
sri-bhagavan uvaca
loke 'smin dvi-vidha nisthapura prokta mayanagha
jnana-yogena sankhyanam
karma-yogena yoginam
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; loke--in
the world; asmin--this; dvi-vidha--two kinds of; nistha--faith; pura--formerly; prokta--were said; maya--by Me; anagha--O sinless one; jnana-yogena--by the linking process of knowledge; sankhyanam--of the empiricphilosophers; karma-yogena--by the linking process of devotion;yoginam--of the devotees.
TRANSLATIONThe Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O sinless Arjuna, I have
already explained that there are two classes of men who try to realizethe self. Some are inclined to understand Him by empirical,philosophical speculation, and others are inclined to know Him bydevotional work.
PURPORTIn the Second Chapter, verse 39, the Lord explained two kinds of
procedures--namely sankhya-yoga and karma-yoga, or buddhi-yoga. In thisverse, the Lord explains the same more clearly. Sankhya-yoga, or theanalytical study of the nature of spirit and matter, is the subjectmatter for persons who are inclined to speculate and understand thingsby experimental knowledge and philosophy. The other class of men workin Krsna consciousness, as it is explained in the 61st verse of theSecond Chapter. The Lord has explained, also in the 39th verse, that byworking by the principles of buddhi-yoga, or Krsna consciousness, onecan be relieved from the bonds of action; and, furthermore, there is noflaw in the process. The same principle is more clearly explained inthe 61st verse--that this buddhi-yoga is to depend entirely on theSupreme (or more specifically, on Krsna), and in this way all thesenses can be brought under control very easily. Therefore, both theyogas are interdependent, as religion and philosophy. Religion withoutphilosophy is sentiment, or sometimes fanaticism, while philosophywithout religion is mental speculation. The ultimate goal is Krsna,because the philosophers who are also sincerely searching after theAbsolute Truth come in the end to Krsna consciousness. This is alsostated in the Bhagavad-gita. The whole process is to understand thereal position of the self in relation to the Superself. The indirectprocess is philosophical speculation, by which, gradually, one may cometo the point of Krsna consciousness; and the other process is directlyconnecting with everything in Krsna consciousness. Of these two, thepath of Krsna consciousness is better because it does not depend onpurifying the senses by a philosophical process. Krsna consciousness isitself the purifying process, and by the direct method of devotionalservice it is simultaneously easy and sublime.
TEXT 4
na karmanam anarambhan
naiskarmyam puruso 'snutena ca sannyasanad evasiddhim samadhigacchati
SYNONYMS
na--without; karmanam--of the prescribed duties; anarambhat--
nonperformance; naiskarmyam--freedom from reaction; purusah--man;asnute--achieve; na--nor; ca--also; sannyasanat--by renunciation; eva--simply; siddhim--success; samadhigacchati--attain.
TRANSLATIONNot by merely abstaining from work can one achieve freedom from
reaction, nor by renunciation alone can one attain perfection.
PURPORTThe renounced order of life can be accepted upon being purified by the
discharge of the prescribed form of duties which are laid down just topurify the hearts of materialistic men. Without purification, onecannot attain success by abruptly adopting the fourth order of life(sannyasa). According to the empirical philosophers, simply by adoptingsannyasa, or retiring from fruitive activities, one at once becomes asgood as Narayana. But Lord Krsna does not approve this principle.Without purification of heart, sannyasa is simply a disturbance to thesocial order. On the other hand, if someone takes to the transcendentalservice of the Lord, even without discharging his prescribed duties,whatever he may be able to advance in the cause is accepted by the Lord(buddhi-yoga). Sv-alpam apy asya dharmasya trayate mahato bhayat. Evena slight performance of such a principle enables one to overcome greatdifficulties.
TEXT 5
na hi kascit ksanam api
jatu tisthaty akarma-krtkaryate hy avasah karmasarvah prakrti-jair gunaih
SYNONYMSna--nor; hi--certainly; kascit--anyone; ksanam--even a moment; api--
also; jatu--even; tisthati--stands; akarma-krt--without doingsomething; karyate--forced to work; hi--certainly; avasah--helplessly;karma--work; sarvah--everything; prakrti-jaih--out of the modes ofmaterial nature; gunaih--by the qualities.
TRANSLATIONAll men are forced to act helplessly according to the impulses born of
the modes of material nature; therefore no one can refrain from doingsomething, not even for a moment.
PURPORTIt is not a question of embodied life, but it is the nature of the soul
to be always active. Without the presence of the spirit soul, thematerial body cannot move. The body is only a dead vehicle to be workedby the spirit soul, which is always active and cannot stop even for amoment. As such, the spirit soul has to be engaged in the good work ofKrsna consciousness, otherwise it will be engaged in occupations
dictated by illusory energy. In contact with material energy, the
spirit soul acquires material modes, and to purify the soul from suchaffinities it is necessary to engage in the prescribed duties enjoinedin the sastras. But if the soul is engaged in his natural function ofKrsna consciousness, whatever he is able to do is good for him. TheSrimad-Bhagavatam (1.5.17) affirms this:
tyaktva sva-dharmam caranambujam harer
bhajann apakvo 'tha patet tato yadiyatra kva vabhadram abhud amusya kimko vartha apto 'bhajatam sva-dharmatah
"If someone takes to Krsna consciousness, even though he may not follow
the prescribed duties in the sastras nor execute the devotional serviceproperly, and even though he may fall down from the standard, there isno loss or evil for him. But if he carries out all the injunctions forpurification in the sastras, what does it avail him if he is not Krsnaconscious?" So the purificatory process is necessary for reaching thispoint of Krsna consciousness. Therefore, sannyasa, or any purificatoryprocess, is to help reach the ultimate goal of becoming Krsnaconscious, without which everything is considered a failure.
TEXT 6
karmendriyani samyamya
ya aste manasa smaranindriyarthan vimudhatmamithyacarah sa ucyate
SYNONYMSkarma-indriyani--the five working sense organs; samyamya--controlling;
yah--anyone who; aste--remains; manasa--by mind; smaran--thinking;indriya-arthan--sense objects; vimudha--foolish; atma--soul; mithya-acarah--pretender; sah--he; ucyate--is called.
TRANSLATION
One who restrains the senses and organs of action, but whose mind
dwells on sense objects, certainly deludes himself and is called apretender.
PURPORTThere are many pretenders who refuse to work in Krsna consciousness but
make a show of meditation, while actually dwelling within the mind uponsense enjoyment. Such pretenders may also speak on dry philosophy inorder to bluff sophisticated followers, but according to this versethese are the greatest cheaters. For sense enjoyment one can act in anycapacity of the social order, but if one follows the rules andregulations of his particular status, he can make gradual progress inpurifying his existence. But he who makes a show of being a yogi, whileactually searching for the objects of sense gratification, must becalled the greatest cheater, even though he sometimes speaks ofphilosophy. His knowledge has no value because the effects of such asinful man's knowledge are taken away by the illusory energy of the
Lord. Such a pretender's mind is always impure, and therefore his show
of yogic meditation has no value whatsoever.
TEXT 7
yas tv indriyani manasa
niyamyarabhate 'rjunakarmendriyaih karma-yogamasaktah sa visisyate
SYNONYMSyah--one who; tu--but; indriyani--senses; manasa--by the mind; niyamya-
-regulating; arabhate--begins; arjuna--O Arjuna; karma-indriyaih--bythe active sense organs; karma-yogam--devotion; asaktah--withoutattachment; sah--he; visisyate--by far the better.
TRANSLATIONOn the other hand, he who controls the senses by the mind and engages
his active organs in works of devotion, without attachment, is by farsuperior.
PURPORTInstead of becoming a pseudo-transcendentalist for the sake of wanton
living and sense enjoyment, it is far better to remain in one's ownbusiness and execute the purpose of life, which is to get free frommaterial bondage and enter into the kingdom of God. The prime svartha-gati, or goal of self-interest, is to reach Visnu. The wholeinstitution of varna and asrama is designed to help us reach this goalof life. A householder can also reach this destination by regulatedservice in Krsna consciousness. For self-realization, one can live acontrolled life, as prescribed in the sastras, and continue carryingout his business without attachment, and in that way make progress.Such a sincere person who follows this method is far better situatedthan the false pretender who adopts show-bottle spiritualism to cheatthe innocent public. A sincere sweeper in the street is far better thanthe charlatan meditator who meditates only for the sake of making aliving.
TEXT 8
niyatam kuru karma tvam
karma jyayo hy akarmanahsarira-yatrapi ca tena prasiddhyed akarmanah
SYNONYMSniyatam--prescribed; kuru--do; karma--duties; tvam--you; karma--work;
jyayah--better; hi--than; akarmanah--without work; sarira--bodily;yatra--maintenance; api--even; ca--also; te--your; na--never;prasiddhyet--effected; akarmanah--without work.
TRANSLATION
Perform your prescribed duty, for action is better than inaction. A man
cannot even maintain his physical body without work.
PURPORTThere are many pseudo-meditators who misrepresent themselves as
belonging to high parentage, and great professional men who falselypose that they have sacrificed everything for the sake of advancementin spiritual life. Lord Krsna did not want Arjuna to become apretender, but that he perform his prescribed duties as set forth forksatriyas. Arjuna was a householder and a military general, andtherefore it was better for him to remain as such and perform hisreligious duties as prescribed for the householder ksatriya. Suchactivities gradually cleanse the heart of a mundane man and free himfrom material contamination. So-called renunciation for the purpose ofmaintenance is never approved by the Lord, nor by any religiousscripture. After all, one has to maintain one's body and soul togetherby some work. Work should not be given up capriciously, withoutpurification of materialistic propensities. Anyone who is in thematerial world is certainly possessed of the impure propensity forlording it over material nature, or, in other words, for sensegratification. Such polluted propensities have to be cleared. Withoutdoing so, through prescribed duties, one should never attempt to becomea so-called transcendentalist, renouncing work and living at the costof others.
TEXT 9
yajnarthat karmano 'nyatra
loko 'yam karma-bandhanahtad-artham karma kaunteyamukta-sangah samacara
SYNONYMSyajna-arthat--only for the sake of Yajna, or Visnu; karmanah--work
done; anyatra--otherwise; lokah--this world; ayam--this; karma-bandhanah--bondage by work; tat--Him; artham--for the sake; karma--work; kaunteya--O son of Kunti; mukta-sangah--liberated fromassociation; samacara--do perfectly.
TRANSLATIONWork done as a sacrifice for Visnu has to be performed, otherwise work
binds one to this material world. Therefore, O son of Kunti, performyour prescribed duties for His satisfaction, and in that way you willalways remain unattached and free from bondage.
PURPORTSince one has to work even for the simple maintenance of the body, the
prescribed duties for a particular social position and quality are somade that that purpose can be fulfilled. Yajna means Lord Visnu, orsacrificial performances. All sacrificial performances also are meantfor the satisfaction of Lord Visnu. The Vedas enjoin: yajno vai visnuh.In other words, the same purpose is served whether one performsprescribed yajnas or directly serves Lord Visnu. Krsna consciousness istherefore performance of yajna as it is prescribed in this verse. The
varnasrama institution also aims at this for satisfying Lord Visnu.
Varnasramacaravata purusena parah puman. visnur aradhyate (Visnu Purana3.8.8). Therefore one has to work for the satisfaction of Visnu. Anyother work done in this material world will be a cause of bondage, forboth good and evil work have their reactions, and any reaction bindsthe performer. Therefore, one has to work in Krsna consciousness tosatisfy Krsna (or Visnu); and while performing such activities one isin a liberated stage. This is the great art of doing work, and in thebeginning this process requires very expert guidance. One shouldtherefore act very diligently, under the expert guidance of a devoteeof Lord Krsna, or under the direct instruction of Lord Krsna Himself(under whom Arjuna had the opportunity to work). Nothing should beperformed for sense gratification, but everything should be done forthe satisfaction of Krsna. This practice will not only save one fromthe reaction of work, but will also gradually elevate one totranscendental loving service of the Lord, which alone can raise one tothe kingdom of God.
TEXT 10
saha-yajnah prajah srstva
purovaca prajapatihanena prasavisyadhvamesa vo 'stv ista-kama-dhuk
SYNONYMSsaha--along with; yajnah--sacrifices; prajah--generations; srstva--
creating; pura--anciently; uvaca--said; praja-patih--the Lord ofcreatures; anena--by this; prasavisyadhvam--be more and moreprosperous; esah--certainly; vah--your; astu--let it be; ista--alldesirable; kama-dhuk--bestower.
TRANSLATIONIn the beginning of creation, the Lord of all creatures sent forth
generations of men and demigods, along with sacrifices for Visnu, andblessed them by saying, "Be thou happy by this yajna [sacrifice]because its performance will bestow upon you all desirable things."
PURPORTThe material creation by the Lord of creatures (Visnu) is a chance
offered to the conditioned souls to come back home--back to Godhead.All living entities within the material creation are conditioned bymaterial nature because of their forgetfulness of their relationship toKrsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Vedic principles are tohelp us understand this eternal relation, as it is stated in theBhagavad-gita: vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah. The Lord says thatthe purpose of the Vedas is to understand Him. In the Vedic hymns it issaid: patim visvasyatmesvaram. Therefore, the Lord of the livingentities is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam also (2.4.20) Srila Sukadeva Gosvami describes the Lord aspati in so many ways:
sriyah patir yajna-patih praja-patir
dhiyam patir loka-patir dhara-patihpatir gatis candhaka-vrsni-satvatam
prasidatam me bhagavan satam patih
The praja-pati is Lord Visnu, and He is the Lord of all living
creatures, all worlds, and all beauties, and the protector of everyone.The Lord created this material world for the conditioned souls to learnhow to perform yajnas (sacrifices) for the satisfaction of Visnu, sothat while in the material world they can live very comfortably withoutanxiety and after finishing the present material body, they can enterinto the kingdom of God. That is the whole program for the conditionedsoul. By performance of yajna, the conditioned souls gradually becomeKrsna conscious and become godly in all respects. In the Age of Kali,the sankirtana-yajna (the chanting of the names of God) is recommendedby the Vedic scriptures, and this transcendental system was introducedby Lord Caitanya for the deliverance of all men in this age.Sankirtana-yajna and Krsna consciousness go well together. Lord Krsnain His devotional form (as Lord Caitanya) is mentioned in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.5.32) as follows, with special reference to thesankirtana-yajna:
krsna-varnam tvisakrsnam
sangopangastra-parsadamyajnaih sankirtana-prayairyajanti hi su-medhasah
"In this Age of Kali, people who are endowed with sufficient
intelligence will worship the Lord, who is accompanied by Hisassociates, by performance of sankirtana-yajna." Other yajnasprescribed in the Vedic literatures are not easy to perform in this Ageof Kali, but the sankirtana-yajna is easy and sublime for all purposes.
TEXT 11
devan bhavayatanena
te deva bhavayantu vahparasparam bhavayantahsreyah param avapsyatha
SYNONYMSdevan--demigods; bhavayata--having pleased; anena--by this sacrifice;
te--those; devah--the demigods; bhavayantu--will please; vah--you;parasparam--mutual; bhavayantah--pleasing one another; sreyah--benediction; param--the supreme; avapsyatha--do you achieve.
TRANSLATIONThe demigods, being pleased by sacrifices, will also please you; thus
nourishing one another, there will reign general prosperity for all.
PURPORTThe demigods are empowered administrators of material affairs. The
supply of air, light, water and all other benedictions for maintainingthe body and soul of every living entity are entrusted to the demigods,who are innumerable assistants in different parts of the body of theSupreme Personality of Godhead. Their pleasures and displeasures aredependent on the performance of yajnas by the human being. Some of theyajnas are meant to satisfy particular demigods; but even in so doing,
Lord Visnu is worshiped in all yajnas as the chief beneficiary. It is
stated also in the Bhagavad-gita that Krsna Himself is the beneficiaryof all kinds of yajnas: bhoktaram yajna-tapasam. Therefore, ultimatesatisfaction of the yajna-pati is the chief purpose of all yajnas. Whenthese yajnas are perfectly performed, naturally the demigods in chargeof the different departments of supply are pleased, and there is noscarcity in the supply of natural products.Performance of yajnas has many side benefits, ultimately leading toliberation from the material bondage. By performance of yajnas, allactivities become purified, as it is stated in the Vedas:
ahara-suddhau sattva-suddhih sattva-suddhau
dhruva smrtih smrti-lambhe sarvagranthinam vipramoksah
As it will be explained in the following verses, by performance of
yajna one's eatables become sanctified, and by eating sanctifiedfoodstuffs one's very existence becomes purified; by the purificationof existence, finer tissues in memory become sanctified, and whenmemory is sanctified, one can think of the path of liberation, and allthese combined together lead to Krsna consciousness, the greatnecessity of present-day society.
TEXT 12
istan bhogan hi vo deva
dasyante yajna-bhavitahtair dattan apradayaibhyoyo bhunkte stena eva sah
SYNONYMSistan--desired; bhogan--necessities of life; hi--certainly; vah--unto
you; devah--the demigods; dasyante--award; yajna-bhavitah--beingsatisfied by the performance of sacrifices; taih--by them; dattan--things given; apradaya--without offering; ebhyah--to the demigods; yah--he who; bhunkte--enjoys; stenah--thief; eva--certainly; sah--is he.
TRANSLATIONIn charge of the various necessities of life, the demigods, being
satisfied by the performance of yajna [sacrifice], supply allnecessities to man. But he who enjoys these gifts without offering themto the demigods in return is certainly a thief.
PURPORTThe demigods are authorized supplying agents on behalf of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Visnu. Therefore, they must be satisfied by theperformance of prescribed yajnas. In the Vedas, there are differentkinds of yajnas prescribed for different kinds of demigods, but all areultimately offered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For one whocannot understand what the Personality of Godhead is, sacrifice to thedemigods is recommended. According to the different material qualitiesof the persons concerned, different types of yajnas are recommended inthe Vedas. Worship of different demigods is also on the same basis--namely, according to different qualities. For example, the meat-eatersare recommended to worship the goddess Kali, the ghastly form ofmaterial nature, and before the goddess the sacrifice of animals is
recommended. But for those who are in the mode of goodness, the
transcendental worship of Visnu is recommended. But ultimately, allyajnas are meant for gradual promotion to the transcendental position.For ordinary men, at least five yajnas, known as panca-maha-yajna, arenecessary.One should know, however, that all the necessities of life that thehuman society requires are supplied by the demigod agents of the Lord.No one can manufacture anything. Take, for example, all the eatables ofhuman society. These eatables include grains, fruits, vegetables, milk,sugar, etc., for persons in the mode of goodness, and also eatables forthe non-vegetarians, like meats, etc., none of which can bemanufactured by men. Then again, take for example heat, light, water,air, etc., which are also necessities of life--none of them can bemanufactured by the human society. Without the Supreme Lord, there canbe no profuse sunlight, moonlight, rainfall, breeze, etc., withoutwhich no one can live. Obviously, our life is dependent on suppliesfrom the Lord. Even for our manufacturing enterprises, we require somany raw materials like metal, sulphur, mercury, manganese, and so manyessentials--all of which are supplied by the agents of the Lord, withthe purpose that we should make proper use of them to keep ourselvesfit and healthy for the purpose of self-realization, leading to theultimate goal of life, namely, liberation from the material strugglefor existence. This aim of life is attained by performance of yajnas.If we forget the purpose of human life and simply take supplies fromthe agents of the Lord for sense gratification and become more and moreentangled in material existence, which is not the purpose of creation,certainly we become thieves, and therefore we are punished by the lawsof material nature. A society of thieves can never be happy becausethey have no aim in life. The gross materialist thieves have noultimate goal of life. They are simply directed to sense gratification;nor do they have knowledge of how to perform yajnas. Lord Caitanya,however, inaugurated the easiest performance of yajna, namely thesankirtana-yajna, which can be performed by anyone in the world whoaccepts the principles of Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 13
yajna-sistasinah santo
mucyante sarva-kilbisaihbhunjate te tv agham papaye pacanty atma-karanat
SYNONYMSyajna-sista--food taken after performance of yajna; asinah--eaters;
santah--the devotees; mucyante--get relief from; sarva--all kinds of;kilbisaih--from sins; bhunjate--enjoy; te--they; tu--but; agham--grievous sins; papah--sinners; ye--those; pacanti--prepare food; atma-karanat--for sense enjoyment.
TRANSLATIONThe devotees of the Lord are released from all kinds of sins because
they eat food which is offered first for sacrifice. Others, who preparefood for personal sense enjoyment, verily eat only sin.
PURPORT
The devotees of the Supreme Lord, or the persons who are in Krsna
consciousness, are called santas, and they are always in love with theLord as it is described in the Brahma-samhita (5.38): premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti. Thesantas, being always in a compact of love with the Supreme Personalityof Godhead, Govinda (the giver of all pleasures), or Mukunda (the giverof liberation), or Krsna (the all-attractive person), cannot acceptanything without first offering it to the Supreme Person. Therefore,such devotees always perform yajnas in different modes of devotionalservice, such as sravanam, kirtanam, smaranam, arcanam, etc., and theseperformances of yajnas keep them always aloof from all kinds ofcontamination of sinful association in the material world. Others, whoprepare food for self or sense gratification, are not only thieves, butare also the eaters of all kinds of sins. How can a person be happy ifhe is both a thief and sinful? It is not possible. Therefore, in orderfor people to become happy in all respects, they must be taught toperform the easy process of sankirtana-yajna, in full Krsnaconsciousness. Otherwise, there can be no peace or happiness in theworld.
TEXT 14
annad bhavanti bhutani
parjanyad anna-sambhavahyajnad bhavati parjanyoyajnah karma-samudbhavah
SYNONYMSannat--from grains; bhavanti--grow; bhutani--the material bodies;
parjanyat--from rains; anna--of food grains; sambhavah--are madepossible; yajnat--from the performance of sacrifice; bhavati--becomespossible; parjanyah--rains; yajnah--performance of yajna; karma--prescribed duties; samudbhavah--born of.
TRANSLATIONAll living bodies subsist on food grains, which are produced from
rains. Rains are produced by performance of yajna [sacrifice], andyajna is born of prescribed duties.
PURPORTSrila Baladeva Vidyabhusana, a great commentator on the Bhagavad-gita,
writes as follows: ye indrady-angatayavasthitam yajnam sarvesvaramvisnum abhyarcya tac-chesam asnanti tena tad deha-yatram sampadayanti,te santah sarvesvarasya yajna-purusasya bhaktah sarva-kilbisair anadi-kala-vivrddhair atmanubhava-prati bandhakair nikhilaih papairvimucyante. The Supreme Lord, who is known as the yajna-purusa, or thepersonal beneficiary of all sacrifices, is the master of all demigods,who serve Him as the different limbs of the body serve the whole.Demigods like Indra, Candra, Varuna, etc., are appointed officers whomanage material affairs, and the Vedas direct sacrifices to satisfythese demigods so that they may be pleased to supply air, light andwater sufficiently to produce food grains. When Lord Krsna isworshiped, the demigods, who are different limbs of the Lord, are alsoautomatically worshiped; therefore there is no separate need to worshipthe demigods. For this reason, the devotees of the Lord, who are in
Krsna consciousness, offer food to Krsna and then eat--a process which
nourishes the body spiritually. By such action not only are past sinfulreactions in the body vanquished, but the body becomes immunized to allcontamination of material nature. When there is an epidemic disease, anantiseptic vaccine protects a person from the attack of such anepidemic. Similarly, food offered to Lord Visnu and then taken by usmakes us sufficiently resistant to material affection, and one who isaccustomed to this practice is called a devotee of the Lord. Therefore,a person in Krsna consciousness, who eats only food offered to Krsna,can counteract all reactions of past material infections, which areimpediments to the progress of self-realization. On the other hand, onewho does not do so continues to increase the volume of sinful action,and this prepares the next body to resemble hogs and dogs, to sufferthe resultant reactions of all sins. The material world is full ofcontaminations, and one who is immunized by accepting prasadam of theLord (food offered to Visnu) is saved from the attack, whereas one whodoes not do so becomes subjected to contamination.Food grains or vegetables are factually eatables. The human being eatsdifferent kinds of food grains, vegetables, fruits, etc., and theanimals eat the refuse of the food grains and vegetables, grass,plants, etc. Human beings who are accustomed to eating meat and fleshmust also depend on the production of vegetation in order to eat theanimals. Therefore, ultimately, we have to depend on the production ofthe field and not on the production of big factories. The fieldproduction is due to sufficient rain from the sky, and such rains arecontrolled by demigods like Indra, sun, moon, etc., and they are allservants of the Lord. The Lord can be satisfied by sacrifices;therefore, one who cannot perform them will find himself in scarcity--that is the law of nature. Yajna, specifically the sankirtana-yajnaprescribed for this age, must therefore be performed to save us atleast from scarcity of food supply.
TEXT 15
karma brahmodbhavam viddhi
brahmaksara-samudbhavamtasmat sarva-gatam brahmanityam yajne pratisthitam
SYNONYMSkarma--work; brahma--Vedas; udbhavam--produced from; viddhi--one should
know; brahma--the Vedas; aksara--the Supreme Brahman (Personality ofGodhead); samudbhavam--directly manifested; tasmat--therefore; sarva-gatam--all-pervading; brahma--transcendence; nityam--eternally; yajne--in sacrifice; pratisthitam--situated.
TRANSLATIONRegulated activities are prescribed in the Vedas, and the Vedas are
directly manifested from the Supreme Personality of Godhead.Consequently the all-pervading Transcendence is eternally situated inacts of sacrifice.
PURPORTYajnartha-karma, or the necessity of work for the satisfaction of Krsna
only, is more expressly stated in this verse. If we have to work for
the satisfaction of the yajna-purusa, Visnu, then we must find out the
direction of work in Brahman, or the transcendental Vedas. The Vedasare therefore codes of working directions. Anything performed withoutthe direction of the Vedas is called vikarma, or unauthorized or sinfulwork. Therefore, one should always take direction from the Vedas to besaved from the reaction of work. As one has to work in ordinary life bythe direction of the state, similarly, one has to work under thedirection of the supreme state of the Lord. Such directions in theVedas are directly manifested from the breathing of the SupremePersonality of Godhead. It is said: asya mahato bhutasya nisvasitametad yad rg-vedo yajur-vedah samavedo 'tharvangirasah. "The four Vedas--namely the Rg Veda, Yajur Veda, Sama Veda and Atharva Veda--are allemanations from the breathing of the great Personality of Godhead."(Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 4.5.11) The Lord, being omnipotent, can speakby breathing air, as it is confirmed in the Brahma-samhita, for theLord has the omnipotence to perform through each of His senses theactions of all other senses. In other words, the Lord can speak throughHis breathing, and He can impregnate by His eyes. In fact, it is saidthat He glanced over material nature and thus fathered all livingentities. After creating or impregnating the conditioned souls in thewomb of material nature, He gave His directions in the Vedic wisdom asto how such conditioned souls can return home, back to Godhead. Weshould always remember that the conditioned souls in material natureare all eager for material enjoyment. But the Vedic directions are somade that one can satisfy one's perverted desires, then return toGodhead, having finished his so-called enjoyment. It is a chance forthe conditioned souls to attain liberation; therefore the conditionedsouls must try to follow the process of yajna by becoming Krsnaconscious. Even those who cannot follow the Vedic injunctions may adoptthe principles of Krsna consciousness, and that will take the place ofperformance of Vedic yajnas, or karmas.
TEXT 16
evam pravartitam cakram
nanuvartayatiha yahaghayur indriyaramomogham partha sa jivati
SYNONYMSevam--thus prescribed; pravartitam--established by the Vedas; cakram--
cycle; na--does not; anuvartayati--adopt; iha--in this life; yah--onewho; agha-ayuh--life full of sins; indriya-aramah--satisfied in sensegratification; mogham--useless; partha--O son of Prtha (Arjuna); sah--one who does so; jivati--lives.
TRANSLATIONMy dear Arjuna, a man who does not follow this prescribed Vedic system
of sacrifice certainly leads a life full of sin, for a persondelighting only in the senses lives in vain.
PURPORTThe mammonist philosophy of work very hard and enjoy sense
gratification is condemned herein by the Lord. Therefore, for those whowant to enjoy this material world, the above-mentioned cycle of
performing yajnas is absolutely necessary. One who does not follow such
regulations is living a very risky life, being condemned more and more.By nature's law, this human form of life is specifically meant forself-realization, in either of the three ways--namely karma-yoga,jnana-yoga or bhakti-yoga. There is no necessity of rigidly followingthe performances of the prescribed yajnas for the transcendentalistswho are above vice and virtue; but those who are engaged in sensegratification require purification by the above-mentioned cycle ofyajna performances. There are different kinds of activities. Those whoare not Krsna conscious are certainly engaged in sensory consciousness;therefore they need to execute pious work. The yajna system is plannedin such a way that sensory conscious persons may satisfy their desireswithout becoming entangled in the reactions of sense-gratificatorywork. The prosperity of the world depends not on our own efforts but onthe background arrangement of the Supreme Lord, directly carried out bythe demigods. Therefore, the yajnas are directly aimed at theparticular demigod mentioned in the Vedas. Indirectly, it is thepractice of Krsna consciousness, because when one masters theperformance of yajnas, one is sure to become Krsna conscious. But if byperforming yajnas one does not become Krsna conscious, such principlesare counted as only moral codes. One should not, therefore, limit hisprogress only to the point of moral codes, but should transcend them,to attain Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 17
yas tv atma-ratir eva syad
atma-trptas ca manavahatmany eva ca santustastasya karyam na vidyate
SYNONYMSyah--one who; tu--but; atma-ratih--takes pleasure; eva--certainly;
syat--remains; atma-trptah--self-illuminated; ca--and; manavah--a man;atmani--in himself; eva--only; ca--and; santustah--perfectly satiated;tasya--his; karyam--duty; na--does not; vidyate--exist.
TRANSLATIONOne who is, however, taking pleasure in the self, who is illuminated in
the self, who rejoices in and is satisfied with the self only, fullysatiated--for him there is no duty.
PURPORTA person who is fully Krsna conscious, and is fully satisfied by his
acts in Krsna consciousness, no longer has any duty to perform. Due tohis being Krsna conscious, all impiety within is instantly cleansed, aneffect of many, many thousands of yajna performances. By such clearingof consciousness, one becomes fully confident of his eternal positionin relationship with the Supreme. His duty thus becomes self-illuminated by the grace of the Lord, and therefore he no longer hasany obligations to the Vedic injunctions. Such a Krsna conscious personis no longer interested in material activities and no longer takespleasure in material arrangements like wine, women and similarinfatuations.
TEXT 18
naiva tasya krtenartho
nakrteneha kascanana casya sarva-bhutesukascid artha-vyapasrayah
SYNONYMSna--never; eva--certainly; tasya--his; krtena--by discharge of duty;
arthah--purpose; na--nor; akrtena--without discharge of duty; iha--inthis world; kascana--whatever; na--never; ca--and; asya--of him; sarva-bhutesu--in all living beings; kascit--any; artha--purpose;vyapasrayah--taking shelter of.
TRANSLATIONA self-realized man has no purpose to fulfill in the discharge of his
prescribed duties, nor has he any reason not to perform such work. Norhas he any need to depend on any other living being.
PURPORTA self-realized man is no longer obliged to perform any prescribed
duty, save and except activities in Krsna consciousness. Krsnaconsciousness is not inactivity either, as will be explained in thefollowing verses. A Krsna conscious man does not take shelter of anyperson--man or demigod. Whatever he does in Krsna consciousness issufficient in the discharge of his obligation.
TEXT 19
tasmad asaktah satatam
karyam karma samacaraasakto hy acaran karmaparam apnoti purusah
SYNONYMStasmat--therefore; asaktah--without attachment; satatam--constantly;
karyam--as duty; karma--work; samacara--perform; asaktah--nonattached;hi--certainly; acaran--performing; karma--work; param--the Supreme;apnoti--achieves; purusah--a man.
TRANSLATIONTherefore, without being attached to the fruits of activities, one
should act as a matter of duty; for by working without attachment oneattains the Supreme.
PURPORTThe Supreme is the Personality of Godhead for the devotees, and
liberation for the impersonalist. A person, therefore, acting forKrsna, or in Krsna consciousness, under proper guidance and withoutattachment to the result of the work, is certainly making progresstoward the supreme goal of life. Arjuna is told that he should fight inthe Battle of Kuruksetra for the interest of Krsna because Krsna wanted
him to fight. To be a good man or a nonviolent man is a personal
attachment, but to act on behalf of the Supreme is to act withoutattachment for the result. That is perfect action of the highestdegree, recommended by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna.Vedic rituals, like prescribed sacrifices, are performed forpurification of impious activities that were performed in the field ofsense gratification. But action in Krsna consciousness istranscendental to the reactions of good or evil work. A Krsna consciousperson has no attachment for the result but acts on behalf of Krsnaalone. He engages in all kinds of activities, but is completelynonattached.
TEXT 20
karmanaiva hi samsiddhim
asthita janakadayahloka-sangraham evapisampasyan kartum arhasi
SYNONYMSkarmana--by work; eva--even; hi--certainly; samsiddhim--perfection;
asthitah--situated; janaka-adayah--Janaka and other kings; loka-sangraham--educating the people in general; eva--also; api--for thesake of; sampasyan--by considering; kartum--to act; arhasi--deserve.
TRANSLATIONKings such as Janaka and others attained the perfectional stage by
performance of prescribed duties. Therefore, just for the sake ofeducating the people in general, you should perform your work.
PURPORTKings like Janaka and others were all self-realized souls; consequently
they had no obligation to perform the prescribed duties in the Vedas.Nonetheless they performed all prescribed activities just to setexamples for the people in general. Janaka was the father of Sita andfather-in-law of Lord Sri Rama. Being a great devotee of the Lord, hewas transcendentally situated, but because he was the king of Mithila(a subdivision of Bihar province in India), he had to teach hissubjects how to fight righteously in battle. He and his subjects foughtto teach people in general that violence is also necessary in asituation where good arguments fail. Before the Battle of Kuruksetra,every effort was made to avoid the war, even by the Supreme Personalityof Godhead, but the other party was determined to fight. So for such aright cause, there is a necessity for fighting. Although one who issituated in Krsna consciousness may not have any interest in the world,he still works to teach the public how to live and how to act.Experienced persons in Krsna consciousness can act in such a way thatothers will follow, and this is explained in the following verse.
TEXT 21
yad yad acarati sresthas
tat tad evetaro janahsa yat pramanam kurutelokas tad anuvartate
SYNONYMS
yat--whatever; yat--and whichever; acarati--does he act; sresthah--a
respectable leader; tat--that; tat--and that alone; eva--certainly;itarah--common; janah--person; sah--he; yat--whichever; pramanam--evidence; kurute--does perform; lokah--all the world; tat--that;anuvartate--follow in the footsteps.
TRANSLATIONWhatever action is performed by a great man, common men follow in his
footsteps. And whatever standards he sets by exemplary acts, all theworld pursues.
PURPORTPeople in general always require a leader who can teach the public by
practical behavior. A leader cannot teach the public to stop smoking ifhe himself smokes. Lord Caitanya said that a teacher should behaveproperly even before he begins teaching. One who teaches in that way iscalled acarya, or the ideal teacher. Therefore, a teacher must followthe principles of sastra (scripture) to reach the common man. Theteacher cannot manufacture rules against the principles of revealedscriptures. The revealed scriptures, like Manu-samhita and similarothers, are considered the standard books to be followed by humansociety. Thus the leader's teaching should be based on the principlesof such standard rules as they are practiced by the great teachers. TheSrimad-Bhagavatam also affirms that one should follow in the footstepsof great devotees, and that is the way of progress on the path ofspiritual realization. The king or the executive head of a state, thefather and the school teacher are all considered to be natural leadersof the innocent people in general. All such natural leaders have agreat responsibility to their dependents; therefore they must beconversant with standard books of moral and spiritual codes.
TEXT 22
na me parthasti kartavyam
trisu lokesu kincanananavaptam avaptavyamvarta eva ca karmani
SYNONYMSna--not; me--Mine; partha--O son of Prtha; asti--there is; kartavyam--
any prescribed duty; trisu--in the three; lokesu--planetary systems;kincana--anything; na--no; anavaptam--in want; avaptavyam--to begained; varte--engaged; eva--certainly; ca--also; karmani--in one'sprescribed duty.
TRANSLATIONO son of Prtha, there is no work prescribed for Me within all the three
planetary systems. Nor am I in want of anything, nor have I need toobtain anything--and yet I am engaged in work.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is described in the Vedic
literatures as follows:
tam isvaranam paramam mahesvaram
tam devatanam paramam ca daivatampatim patinam paramam parastadvidama devam bhuvanesam idyam
na tasya karyam karanam ca vidyate
na tat-samas cabhyadhikas ca drsyateparasya saktir vividhaiva sruyatesvabhaviki jnana-bala-kriya ca
"The Supreme Lord is the controller of all other controllers, and He is
the greatest of all the diverse planetary leaders. Everyone is underHis control. All entities are delegated with particular power only bythe Supreme Lord; they are not supreme themselves. He is alsoworshipable by all demigods and is the supreme director of alldirectors. Therefore, He is transcendental to all kinds of materialleaders and controllers and is worshipable by all. There is no onegreater than Him, and He is the supreme cause of all causes."He does not possess bodily form like that of an ordinary livingentity. There is no difference between His body and His soul. He isabsolute. All His senses are transcendental. Any one of His senses canperform the action of any other sense. Therefore no one is greater thanHim or equal to Him. His potencies are multifarious, and thus His deedsare automatically performed as a natural sequence." (SvetasvataraUpanisad 6.7-8)Since everything is in full opulence in the Personality of Godhead andis existing in full truth, there is no duty for the Supreme Personalityof Godhead to perform. One who must receive the results of work hassome designated duty, but one who has nothing to achieve within thethree planetary systems certainly has no duty. And yet Lord Krsna isengaged on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra as the leader of the ksatriyasbecause the ksatriyas are duty-bound to give protection to thedistressed. Although He is above all the regulations of the revealedscriptures, He does not do anything that violates the revealedscriptures.
TEXT 23
yadi hy aham na varteyam
jatu karmany atandritahmama vartmanuvartantemanusyah partha sarvasah
SYNONYMSyadi--if; hi--certainly; aham--I; na--do not; varteyam--thus engage;
jatu--ever; karmani--in the performance of prescribed duties;atandritah--with great care; mama--My; vartma--path; anuvartante--wouldfollow; manusyah--all men; partha--O son of Prtha; sarvasah--in allrespects.
TRANSLATION
For if I did not engage in work, O Partha, certainly all men would
follow My path.
PURPORTIn order to keep the balance of social tranquillity for progress in
spiritual life, there are traditional family usages meant for everycivilized man. Although such rules and regulations are for theconditioned souls and not Lord Krsna, because He descended to establishthe principles of religion, He followed the prescribed rules.Otherwise, common men would follow in His footsteps, because He is thegreatest authority. From the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is understood thatLord Krsna was performing all the religious duties at home and out ofhome, as required of a householder.
TEXT 24
utsideyur ime loka
na kuryam karma ced ahamsankarasya ca karta syamupahanyam imah prajah
SYNONYMSutsideyuh--put into ruin; ime--all these; lokah--worlds; na--do not;
kuryam--perform; karma--prescribed duties; cet--if; aham--I;sankarasya--of unwanted population; ca--and; karta--creator; syam--shall be; upahanyam--destroy; imah--all these; prajah--living entities.
TRANSLATIONIf I should cease to work, then all these worlds would be put to
ruination. I would also be the cause of creating unwanted population,and I would thereby destroy the peace of all sentient beings.
PURPORTVarna-sankara is unwanted population which disturbs the peace of the
general society. In order to check this social disturbance, there areprescribed rules and regulations by which the population canautomatically become peaceful and organized for spiritual progress inlife. When Lord Krsna descends, naturally He deals with such rules andregulations in order to maintain the prestige and necessity of suchimportant performances. The Lord is the father of all living entities,and if the living entities are misguided, indirectly the responsibilitygoes to the Lord. Therefore, whenever there is general disregard ofregulative principles, the Lord Himself descends and corrects thesociety. We should, however, note carefully that although we have tofollow in the footsteps of the Lord, we still have to remember that wecannot imitate Him. Following and imitating are not on the same level.We cannot imitate the Lord by lifting Govardhana Hill, as the Lord didin His childhood. It is impossible for any human being. We have tofollow His instructions, but we may not imitate Him at any time. TheSrimad-Bhagavatam (10.33.30-31) affirms:
naitat samacarej jatu
manasapi hy anisvarahvinasyaty acaran maudhyad
yatha 'rudro 'bdhi-jam visam
isvaranam vacah satyam
tathaivacaritam kvacittesam yat sva-vaco-yuktambuddhimams tat samacaret
"One should simply follow the instructions of the Lord and His
empowered servants. Their instructions are all good for us, and anyintelligent person will perform them as instructed. However, one shouldguard against trying to imitate their actions. One should not try todrink the ocean of poison in imitation of Lord Siva."We should always consider the position of the isvaras, or those who canactually control the movements of the sun and moon, as superior.Without such power, one cannot imitate the isvaras, who aresuperpowerful. Lord Siva drank poison to the extent of swallowing anocean, but if any common man tries to drink even a fragment of suchpoison, he will be killed. There are many pseudo-devotees of Lord Sivawho want to indulge in smoking ganja (marijuana) and similarintoxicating drugs, forgetting that by so imitating the acts of LordSiva they are calling death very near. Similarly, there are somepseudo-devotees of Lord Krsna who prefer to imitate the Lord in Hisrasa-lila, or dance of love, forgetting their inability to liftGovardhana Hill. It is best, therefore, that one not try to imitate thepowerful, but simply follow their instructions; nor should one try tooccupy their posts without qualification. There are so many"incarnations" of God without the power of the Supreme Godhead.
TEXT 25
saktah karmany avidvamso
yatha kurvanti bharatakuryad vidvams tathasaktascikirsur loka-sangraham
SYNONYMSsaktah--being attached; karmani--prescribed duties; avidvamsah--the
ignorant; yatha--as much as; kurvanti--do it; bharata--O descendant ofBharata; kuryat--must do; vidvan--the learned; tatha--thus; asaktah--without attachment; cikirsuh--desiring to; loka-sangraham--leading thepeople in general.
TRANSLATIONAs the ignorant perform their duties with attachment to results,
similarly the learned may also act, but without attachment, for thesake of leading the people on the right path.
PURPORTA person in Krsna consciousness and a person not in Krsna consciousness
are differentiated by different desires. A Krsna conscious person doesnot do anything which is not conducive to development of Krsnaconsciousness. He may even act exactly like the ignorant person, who istoo much attached to material activities, but one is engaged in suchactivities for the satisfaction of his sense gratification, whereas theother is engaged for the satisfaction of Krsna. Therefore, the Krsna
conscious person is required to show the people how to act and how to
engage the results of action for the purpose of Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 26
na buddhi-bhedam janayed
ajnanam karma-sanginamjosayet sarva-karmanividvan yuktah samacaran
SYNONYMSna--do not; buddhi-bhedam--disrupt the intelligence; janayet--do;
ajnanam--of the foolish; karma-sanginam--attached to fruitive work;josayet--dovetailed; sarva--all; karmani--work; vidvan--learned;yuktah--all engaged; samacaran--practicing.
TRANSLATIONLet not the wise disrupt the minds of the ignorant who are attached to
fruitive action, they should not be encouraged to refrain from work,but to engage in work in the spirit of devotion.
PURPORTVedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah: That is the end of all Vedic
rituals. All rituals, all performances of sacrifices, and everythingthat is put into the Vedas, including all direction for materialactivities, are meant for understanding Krsna, who is the ultimate goalof life. But because the conditioned souls do not know anything beyondsense gratification, they study the Vedas to that end. Through senseregulations, however, one is gradually elevated to Krsna consciousness.Therefore a realized soul in Krsna consciousness should not disturbothers in their activities or understanding, but he should act byshowing how the results of all work can be dedicated to the service ofKrsna. The learned Krsna conscious person may act in such a way thatthe ignorant person working for sense gratification may learn how toact and how to behave. Although the ignorant man is not to be disturbedin his activities, still, a slightly developed Krsna conscious personmay directly be engaged in the service of the Lord without waiting forother Vedic formulas. For this fortunate man there is no need to followthe Vedic rituals, because in direct Krsna consciousness one can haveall the results simply by following the prescribed duties of aparticular person.
TEXT 27
prakrteh kriyamanani
gunaih karmani sarvasahahankara-vimudhatmakartaham iti manyate
SYNONYMSprakrteh--of material nature; kriyamanani--all being done; gunaih--by
the modes; karmani--activities; sarvasah--all kinds of; ahankara-vimudha--bewildered by false ego; atma--the spirit soul; karta--doer;aham--I; iti--thus; manyate--thinks.
TRANSLATION
The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of
material nature, thinks himself to be the doer of activities, which arein actuality carried out by nature.
PURPORTTwo persons, one in Krsna consciousness and the other in material
consciousness, working on the same level, may appear to be working onthe same platform, but there is a wide gulf of difference in theirrespective positions. The person in material consciousness is convincedby false ego that he is the doer of everything. He does not know thatthe mechanism of the body is produced by material nature, which worksunder the supervision of the Supreme Lord. The materialistic person hasno knowledge that ultimately he is under the control of Krsna. Theperson in false ego takes all credit for doing everythingindependently, and that is the symptom of his nescience. He does notknow that this gross and subtle body is the creation of materialnature, under the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and assuch his bodily and mental activities should be engaged in the serviceof Krsna, in Krsna consciousness. The ignorant man forgets that theSupreme Personality of Godhead is known as Hrsikesa, or the master ofthe senses of the material body, for due to his long misuse of thesenses in sense gratification, he is factually bewildered by the falseego, which makes him forget his eternal relationship with Krsna.
TEXT 28
tattva-vit tu maha-baho
guna-karma-vibhagayohguna gunesu vartantaiti matva na sajjate
SYNONYMStattva-vit--the knower of the Absolute Truth; tu--but; maha-baho--O
mighty-armed one; guna-karma--works under material influence;vibhagayoh--differences; gunah--senses; gunesu--in sense gratification;vartante--being engaged; iti--thus; matva--thinking; na--never;sajjate--becomes attached.
TRANSLATIONOne who is in knowledge of the Absolute Truth, O mighty-armed, does not
engage himself in the senses and sense gratification, knowing well thedifferences between work in devotion and work for fruitive results.
PURPORTThe knower of the Absolute Truth is convinced of his awkward position
in material association. He knows that he is part and parcel of theSupreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, and that his position should notbe in the material creation. He knows his real identity as part andparcel of the Supreme, who is eternal bliss and knowledge, and herealizes that somehow or other he is entrapped in the materialconception of life. In his pure state of existence he is meant to
dovetail his activities in devotional service to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krsna. He therefore engages himself in theactivities of Krsna consciousness and becomes naturally unattached tothe activities of the material senses, which are all circumstantial andtemporary. He knows that his material condition of life is under thesupreme control of the Lord; consequently he is not disturbed by allkinds of material reactions, which he considers to be the mercy of theLord. According to Srimad-Bhagavatam, one who knows the Absolute Truthin three different features--namely Brahman, Paramatma, and the SupremePersonality of Godhead--is called tattva-vit, for he knows also his ownfactual position in relationship with the Supreme.
TEXT 29
prakrter guna-sammudhah
sajjante guna-karmasutan akrtsna-vido mandankrtsna-vin na vicalayet
SYNONYMSprakrteh--impelled by the material modes; guna-sammudhah--befooled by
material identification; sajjante--become engaged; guna-karmasu--inmaterial activities; tan--all those; akrtsna-vidah--persons with a poorfund of knowledge; mandan--lazy to understand self-realization; krtsna-vit--one who is in factual knowledge; na--may not; vicalayet--try toagitate.
TRANSLATIONBewildered by the modes of material nature, the ignorant fully engage
themselves in material activities and become attached. But the wiseshould not unsettle them, although these duties are inferior due to theperformers' lack of knowledge.
PURPORTPersons who are unknowledgeable falsely identify with gross material
consciousness and are full of material designations. This body is agift of the material nature, and one who is too much attached to thebodily consciousness is called mandan, or a lazy person withoutunderstanding of spirit soul. Ignorant men think of the body as theself; bodily connections with others are accepted as kinsmanship, theland in which the body is obtained is the object of worship; and theformalities of religious rituals are considered ends in themselves.Social work, nationalism, and altruism are some of the activities forsuch materially designated persons. Under the spell of suchdesignations, they are always busy in the material field; for themspiritual realization is a myth and so they are not interested. Suchbewildered persons may even be engaged in such primary moral principlesof life as nonviolence and similar materially benevolent work. Thosewho are, however, enlightened in spiritual life, should not try toagitate such materially engrossed persons. Better to prosecute one'sown spiritual activities silently.Men who are ignorant cannot appreciate activities in Krsnaconsciousness, and therefore Lord Krsna advises us not to disturb themand simply waste valuable time. But the devotees of the Lord are morekind than the Lord because they understand the purpose of the Lord.
Consequently they undertake all kinds of risks, even to the point of
approaching ignorant men to try to engage them in the acts of Krsnaconsciousness, which are absolutely necessary for the human being.
TEXT 30
mayi sarvani karmani
sannyasyadhyatma-cetasanirasir nirmamo bhutvayudhyasva vigata-jvarah
SYNONYMSmayi--unto Me; sarvani--all sorts of; karmani--activities; sannyasya--
giving up completely; adhyatma--with full knowledge of the self;cetasa--consciousness; nirasih--without desire for profit; nirmamah--without ownership; bhutva--so being; yudhyasva--fight; vigata-jvarah--without being lethargic.
TRANSLATIONTherefore, O Arjuna, surrendering all your works unto Me, with mind
intent on Me, and without desire for gain and free from egoism andlethargy, fight.
PURPORTThis verse clearly indicates the purpose of the Bhagavad-gita. The Lord
instructs that one has to become fully Krsna conscious to dischargeduties, as if in military discipline. Such an injunction may makethings a little difficult; nevertheless duties must be carried out,with dependence on Krsna, because that is the constitutional positionof the living entity. The living entity cannot be happy independent ofthe cooperation of the Supreme Lord because the eternal constitutionalposition of the living entity is to become subordinate to the desiresof the Lord. Arjuna was, therefore, ordered by Sri Krsna to fight as ifthe Lord were his military commander. One has to sacrifice everythingfor the good will of the Supreme Lord, and at the same time dischargeprescribed duties without claiming proprietorship. Arjuna did not haveto consider the order of the Lord; he had only to execute His order.The Supreme Lord is the soul of all souls; therefore, one who dependssolely and wholly on the Supreme Soul without personal consideration,or in other words, one who is fully Krsna conscious, is calledadhyatma-cetasa. Nirasih means that one has to act on the order of themaster. Nor should one ever expect fruitive results. The cashier maycount millions of dollars for his employer, but he does not claim acent for himself. Similarly, one has to realize that nothing in theworld belongs to any individual person, but that everything belongs tothe Supreme Lord. That is the real purport of mayi, or "unto Me." Andwhen one acts in such Krsna consciousness, certainly he does not claimproprietorship over anything. This consciousness is called nirmama, or"nothing is mine." And, if there is any reluctance to execute such astern order which is without consideration of so-called kinsmen in thebodily relationship, that reluctance should be thrown off; in this wayone may become vigata-jvara or without feverish mentality or lethargy.Everyone, according to his quality and position, has a particular typeof work to discharge, and all such duties may be discharged in Krsna
consciousness, as described above. That will lead one to the path of
liberation.
TEXT 31
ye me matam idam nityam
anutisthanti manavahsraddhavanto 'nasuyantomucyante te 'pi karmabhih
SYNONYMSye--those; me--My; matam--injunctions; idam--this; nityam--eternal
function; anutisthanti--execute regularly; manavah--humankind; sraddha-vantah--with faith and devotion; anasuyantah--without envy; mucyante--become free; te--all of them; api--even; karmabhih--from the bondage ofthe law of fruitive action.
TRANSLATIONOne who execute his duties according to My injunctions and who follows
this teaching faithfully, without envy, becomes free from the bondageof fruitive actions.
PURPORTThe injunction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is the
essence of all Vedic wisdom, and therefore is eternally true withoutexception. As the Vedas are eternal, so this truth of Krsnaconsciousness is also eternal. One should have firm faith in thisinjunction, without envying the Lord. There are many philosophers whowrite comments on the Bhagavad-gita but have no faith in Krsna. Theywill never be liberated from the bondage of fruitive action. But anordinary man with firm faith in the eternal injunctions of the Lord,even though unable to execute such orders, becomes liberated from thebondage of the law of karma. In the beginning of Krsna consciousness,one may not fully discharge the injunctions of the Lord, but becauseone is not resentful of this principle and works sincerely withoutconsideration of defeat and hopelessness, he will surely be promoted tothe stage of pure Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 32
ye tv etad abhyasuyanto
nanutisthanti me matamsarva-jnana-vimudhams tanviddhi nastan acetasah
SYNONYMSye--those; tu--however; etat--this; abhyasuyantah--out of envy; na--do
not; anutisthanti--regularly perform; me--My; matam--injunction; sarva-jnana--all sorts of knowledge; vimudhan--perfectly befooled; tan--theyare; viddhi--know it well; nastan--all ruined; acetasah--without Krsnaconsciousness.
TRANSLATION
But those who, out of envy disregard these teachings and do not
practice them regularly, are to be considered bereft of all knowledge,befooled, and doomed to ignorance and bondage.
PURPORTThe flaw of not being Krsna conscious is clearly stated herein. As
there is punishment for disobedience to the order of the supremeexecutive head, so there is certainly punishment for the disobedienceof the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. A disobedientperson, however great he may be, is ignorant of his own self, of theSupreme Brahman, and Paramatma and the Personality of Godhead, due to avacant heart. Therefore there is no hope of perfection of life for him.
TEXT 33
sadrsam cestate svasyah
prakrter jnanavan apiprakrtim yanti bhutaninigrahah kim karisyati
SYNONYMSsadrsam--accordingly; cestate--tries; svasyah--in one's own nature;
prakrteh--modes; jnana-van--learned; api--although; prakrtim--nature;yanti--undergo; bhutani--all living entities; nigrahah--suppression;kim--what; karisyati--can do.
TRANSLATIONEven a man of knowledge acts according to his own nature, for everyone
follows his nature. What can repression accomplish?
PURPORTUnless one is situated on the transcendental platform of Krsna
consciousness he cannot get free from the influence of the modes ofmaterial nature, as it is confirmed by the Lord in the Seventh Chapter(7.14). Therefore, even for the most highly educated person on themundane plane, it is impossible to get out of the entanglement of mayasimply by theoretical knowledge, or by separating the soul from thebody. There are many so-called spiritualists who outwardly pose to beadvanced in the science, but inwardly or privately are completely underthe particular modes of nature which they are unable to surpass.Academically, one may be very learned, but because of his longassociation with material nature, he is in bondage. Krsna consciousnesshelps one to get out of the material entanglement, even though one maybe engaged in his prescribed duties. Therefore, without being fully inKrsna consciousness, no one should suddenly give up his prescribedduties and become a so-called yogi or transcendentalist artificially.It is better to be situated in one's position and try to attain Krsnaconsciousness under superior training. Thus one may be freed from theclutches of maya.
TEXT 34
indriyasyendriyasyarthe
raga-dvesau vyavasthitau
tayor na vasam agacchet
tau hy asya paripanthinau
SYNONYMSindriyasya--of the senses; indriyasya arthe--in the sense objects;
raga--attachment; dvesau--also detachment; vyavasthitau--put underregulations; tayoh--of them; na--never; vasam--control; agacchet--oneshould come; tau--those; hi--certainly; asya--his; paripanthinau--stumbling blocks.
TRANSLATIONAttraction and repulsion for sense objects are felt by embodied beings,
but one should not fall under the control of senses and sense objectsbecause they are stumbling blocks on the path of self-realization.
PURPORTThose who are in Krsna consciousness are naturally reluctant to engage
in material sense gratification. But those who are not in suchconsciousness should follow the rules and regulations of the revealedscriptures. Unrestricted sense enjoyment is the cause of materialencagement, but one who follows the rules and regulations of therevealed scriptures does not become entangled by the sense objects. Forexample, sex enjoyment is a necessity for the conditioned soul, and sexenjoyment is allowed under the license of marriage ties. For example,according to scriptural injunctions, one is forbidden to engage in sexrelationships with any women other than one's wife. All other women areto be considered as one's mother. But, in spite of such injunctions, aman is still inclined to have sex relationships with other women. Thesepropensities are to be curbed; otherwise they will be stumbling blockson the path of self-realization. As long as the material body is there,the necessities of the material body are allowed, but under rules andregulations. And yet, we should not rely upon the control of suchallowances. One has to follow these rules and regulations, unattachedto them, because practice of sense gratification under regulations mayalso lead one to go astray--as much as there is always the chance of anaccident, even on the royal roads. Although they may be very carefullymaintained, no one can guarantee that there will be no danger even onthe safest road. The sense enjoyment spirit has been current a verylong, long time, owing to material association. Therefore, in spite ofregulated sense enjoyment, there is every chance of falling down;therefore any attachment for regulated sense enjoyment must also beavoided by all means. But action in the loving service of Krsnadetaches one from all kinds of sensory activities. Therefore, no oneshould try to be detached from Krsna consciousness at any stage oflife. The whole purpose of detachment from all kinds of senseattachment is ultimately to become situated on the platform of Krsnaconsciousness.
TEXT 35
sreyan sva-dharmo vigunah
para-dharmat sv-anusthitatsva-dharme nidhanam sreyahpara-dharmo bhayavahah
SYNONYMS
sreyan--far better; sva-dharmah--one's prescribed duties; vigunah--even
faulty; para-dharmat--from duties mentioned for others; su-anusthitat--than perfectly done; sva-dharme--in one's prescribed duties; nidhanam--destruction; sreyah--better; para-dharmah--duties prescribed forothers; bhaya-avahah--dangerous.
TRANSLATIONIt is far better to discharge one's prescribed duties, even though they
may be faultily, than another's duties. Destruction in the course ofperforming one's own duty is better than engaging in another's duties,for to follow another's path is dangerous.
PURPORTOne should therefore discharge his prescribed duties in full Krsna
consciousness rather than those prescribed for others. Prescribedduties complement one's psychophysical condition, under the spell ofthe modes of material nature. Spiritual duties are as ordered by thespiritual master, for the transcendental service of Krsna. But bothmaterially or spiritually, one should stick to his prescribed dutieseven up to death, rather than imitate another's prescribed duties.Duties on the spiritual platform and duties on the material platformmay be different, but the principle of following the authorizeddirection is always good for the performer. When one is under the spellof the modes of material nature, one should follow the prescribed rulesfor particular situations and should not imitate others. For example, abrahmana, who is in the mode of goodness, is nonviolent, whereas aksatriya, who is in the mode of passion, is allowed to be violent. Assuch, for a ksatriya it is better to be vanquished following the rulesof violence than to imitate a brahmana who follows the principles ofnonviolence. Everyone has to cleanse his heart by a gradual process,not abruptly. However, when one transcends the modes of material natureand is fully situated in Krsna consciousness, he can perform anythingand everything under the direction of the bona fide spiritual master.In that complete stage of Krsna consciousness, the ksatriya may act asa brahmana, or a brahmana may act as a ksatriya. In the transcendentalstage, the distinctions of the material world do not apply. Forexample, Visvamitra was originally a ksatriya, but later on he acted asa brahmana, whereas Parasurama was a brahmana, but later on he acted asa ksatriya. Being transcendentally situated, they could do so; but aslong as one is on the material platform, he must perform his dutiesaccording to the modes of material nature. At the same time, he musthave a full sense of Krsna consciousness.TEXT 36
arjuna uvaca
atha kena prayukto 'yampapam carati purusahanicchann api varsneyabalad iva niyojitah
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; atha--hereafter; kena--by what; prayuktah--
impelled; ayam--one; papam--sins; carati--acts; purusah--a man;
anicchan--without desiring; api--although; varsneya--O descendant of
Vrsni; balat--by force; iva--as if; niyojitah--engaged.
TRANSLATIONArjuna said: O descendant of Vrsni, by what is one impelled to sinful
acts, even unwillingly, as if engaged by force?
PURPORTA living entity, as part and parcel of the Supreme, is originally
spiritual, pure, and free from all material contaminations. Therefore,by nature he is not subjected to the sins of the material world. Butwhen he is in contact with the material nature, he acts in many sinfulways without hesitation, and sometimes even against his will. As such,Arjuna's question to Krsna is very sanguine, as to the perverted natureof the living entities. Although the living entity sometimes does notwant to act in sin, he is still forced to act. Sinful actions are not,however, impelled by the Supersoul within, but are due to anothercause, as the Lord explains in the next verse.
TEXT 37
sri-bhagavan uvaca
kama esa krodha esarajo-guna-samudbhavahmahasano maha-papmaviddhy enam iha vairinam
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Personality of Godhead said; kamah--lust; esah-
-all these; krodhah--wrath; esah--all these; rajah-guna--the mode ofpassion; samudbhavah--born of; maha-asanah--all-devouring; maha-papma--greatly sinful; viddhi--know; enam--this; iha--in the material world;vairinam--greatest enemy.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: It is lust only, Arjuna, which is born of
contact with the material mode of passion and later transformed intowrath, and which is the all-devouring, sinful enemy of this world.
PURPORTWhen a living entity comes in contact with the material creation, his
eternal love for Krsna is transformed into lust, in association withthe mode of passion. Or, in other words, the sense of love of Godbecomes transformed into lust, as milk in contact with sour tamarind istransformed into yogurt. Then again, when lust is unsatisfied, it turnsinto wrath; wrath is transformed into illusion, and illusion continuesthe material existence. Therefore, lust is the greatest enemy of theliving entity, and it is lust only which induces the pure living entityto remain entangled in the material world. Wrath is the manifestationof the mode of ignorance; these modes exhibit themselves as wrath andother corollaries. If, therefore, the mode of passion, instead of beingdegraded into the mode of ignorance, is elevated to the mode of
goodness by the prescribed method of living and acting, then one can be
saved from the degradation of wrath by spiritual attachment.The Supreme Personality of Godhead expanded Himself into many for Hisever-increasing spiritual bliss, and the living entities are parts andparcels of this spiritual bliss. They also have partial independence,but by misuse of their independence, when the service attitude istransformed into the propensity for sense enjoyment, they come underthe sway of lust. This material creation is created by the Lord to givea facility to the conditioned souls to fulfill these lustfulpropensities, and when they are completely baffled by prolonged lustfulactivities, the living entities begin to inquire about their realposition.This inquiry is the beginning of the Vedanta-sutras, wherein it issaid, athato brahma-jijnasa: one should inquire into the Supreme. Andthe Supreme is defined in the Srimad-Bhagavatam as janmady asya yato'nvayad itaratas ca, or, "The origin of everything is the SupremeBrahman." Therefore, the origin of lust is also in the Supreme. If,therefore, lust is transformed into love for the Supreme, ortransformed into Krsna consciousness--or, in other words, desiringeverything for Krsna--then both lust and wrath can be spiritualized.Hanuman, the greatest servitor of Lord Rama, engaged his wrath upon hisenemies for the satisfaction of the Lord. Therefore, lust and wrath,when they are employed in Krsna consciousness, become our friendsinstead of our enemies.
TEXT 38
dhumenavriyate vahnir
yathadarso malena cayatholbenavrto garbhastatha tenedam avrtam
SYNONYMSdhumena--by smoke; avriyate--covered; vahnih--fire; yatha--just as;
adarsah--mirror; malena--by dust; ca--also; yatha--just as; ulbena--bythe womb; avrtah--is covered; garbhah--embryo; tatha--so; tena--by thatlust; idam--this; avrtam--is covered.
TRANSLATIONAs fire is covered by smoke, as a mirror is covered by dust, or as the
embryo is covered by the womb, similarly, the living entity is coveredby different degrees of this lust.
PURPORTThere are three degrees of covering of the living entity by which his
pure consciousness is obscured. This covering is but lust underdifferent manifestations like smoke in the fire, dust on the mirror,and the womb about the embryo. When lust is compared to smoke, it isunderstood that the fire of the living spark can be a little perceived.In other words when the living entity exhibits his Krsna consciousnessslightly, he may be likened to the fire covered by smoke. Although fireis necessary where there is smoke, there is no overt manifestation offire in the early stage. This stage is like the beginning of Krsnaconsciousness. The dust on the mirror refers to a cleansing process ofthe mirror of the mind by so many spiritual methods. The best process
is to chant the holy names of the Lord. The embryo covered by the womb
is an analogy illustrating a helpless position, for the child in thewomb is so helpless that he cannot even move. This stage of livingcondition can be compared to that of the trees. The trees are alsoliving entities, but they have been put in such a condition of life bysuch a great exhibition of lust that they are almost void of allconsciousness. The covered mirror is compared to the birds and beasts,and the smoke covered fire is compared to the human being. In the formof a human being, the living entity may revive a little Krsnaconsciousness, and, if he makes further development, the fire ofspiritual life can be kindled in the human form of life. By carefulhandling of the smoke in the fire, the fire can be made to blaze.Therefore the human form of life is a chance for the living entity toescape the entanglement of material existence. In the human form oflife, one can conquer the enemy, lust, by cultivation of Krsnaconsciousness under able guidance.
TEXT 39
avrtam jnanam etena
jnanino nitya-vairinakama-rupena kaunteyaduspurenanalena ca
SYNONYMSavrtam--covered; jnanam--pure consciousness; etena--by this; jnaninah--
of the knower; nitya-vairina--eternal enemy; kama-rupena--in the formof lust; kaunteya--O son of Kunti; duspurena--never to be satisfied;analena--by the fire; ca--also.
TRANSLATIONThus, a man's pure consciousness is covered by his eternal enemy in the
form of lust, which is never satisfied and which burns like fire.
PURPORTIt is said in the Manu-smrti that lust cannot be satisfied by any
amount of sense enjoyment, just as fire is never extinguished by aconstant supply of fuel. In the material world, the center of allactivities is sex, and thus this material world is called maithunya-agara, or the shackles of sex life. In the ordinary prison house,criminals are kept within bars; similarly, the criminals who aredisobedient to the laws of the Lord are shackled by sex life.Advancement of material civilization on the basis of sensegratification means increasing the duration of the material existenceof a living entity. Therefore, this lust is the symbol of ignorance bywhich the living entity is kept within the material world. While oneenjoys sense gratification, it may be that there is some feeling ofhappiness, but actually that so-called feeling of happiness is theultimate enemy of the sense enjoyer.
TEXT 40
indriyani mano buddhir
asyadhisthanam ucyateetair vimohayaty esa
jnanam avrtya dehinam
SYNONYMSindriyani--the senses; manah--the mind; buddhih--the intelligence;
asya--of the lust; adhisthanam--sitting place; ucyate--called; etaih--by all these; vimohayati--bewilders; esah--of this; jnanam--knowledge;avrtya--covering; dehinam--the embodied.
TRANSLATIONThe senses, the mind and the intelligence are the sitting places of
this lust, which veils the real knowledge of the living entity andbewilders him.
PURPORTThe enemy has captured different strategic positions in the body of the
conditioned soul, and therefore Lord Krsna is giving hints of thoseplaces, so that one who wants to conquer the enemy may know where hecan be found. Mind is the center of all the activities of the senses,and thus the mind is the reservoir of all ideas of sense gratification;and, as a result, the mind and the senses become the repositories oflust. Next, the intelligence department becomes the capital of suchlustful propensities. Intelligence is the immediate next-door neighborof the spirit soul. Lusty intelligence influences the spirit soul toacquire the false ego and identify itself with matter, and thus withthe mind and the senses. The spirit soul becomes addicted to enjoyingthe material senses and mistakes this as true happiness. This falseidentification of the spirit soul is very nicely explained in theSrimad-Bhagavatam (10.84.13):
yasyatma-buddhih kunape tri-dhatuke
sva-dhih kalatradisu bhauma ijya-dhihyat-tirtha-buddhih salile na karhicijjanesv abhijnesu sa eva go-kharah
"A human being who identifies this body made of three elements with his
self, who considers the by-products of the body to be his kinsmen, whoconsiders the land of birth as worshipable, and who goes to the placeof pilgrimage simply to take a bath rather than meet men oftranscendental knowledge there, is to be considered as an ass or a cow.
TEXT 41
tasmat tvam indriyany adau
niyamya bharatarsabhapapmanam prajahi hy enamjnana-vijnana-nasanam
SYNONYMStasmat--therefore; tvam--you; indriyani--senses; adau--in the
beginning; niyamya--by regulating; bharata-rsabha--O chief amongst thedescendants of Bharata; papmanam--the great symbol of sin; prajahi--curb; hi--certainly; enam--this; jnana--knowledge; vijnana--scientificknowledge of the pure soul; nasanam--the destroyer.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O Arjuna, best of the Bharatas, in the very beginning curb
this great symbol of sin [lust] by regulating the senses, and slay thisdestroyer of knowledge and self-realization.
PURPORTThe Lord advised Arjuna to regulate the senses from the very beginning
so that he could curb the greatest sinful enemy, lust, which destroysthe urge for self-realization and specifically knowledge of the self.Jnana refers to knowledge of self as distinguished from non-self, or,in other words, knowledge that the spirit soul is not the body. Vijnanarefers to specific knowledge of the spirit soul and knowledge of one'sconstitutional position and his relationship to the Supreme Soul. It isexplained thus in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (2.9.31):
jnanam parama-guhyam me
yad vijnana-samanvitamsa-rahasyam tad-angam cagrhana gaditam maya
"The knowledge of the self and the Supreme Self is very confidential
and mysterious, being veiled by maya, but such knowledge and specificrealization can be understood if it is explained by the Lord Himself."Bhagavad-gita gives us that knowledge, specifically knowledge of theself. The living entities are parts and parcels of the Lord, andtherefore they are simply meant to serve the Lord. This consciousnessis called Krsna consciousness. So, from the very beginning of life onehas to learn this Krsna consciousness, and thereby one may become fullyKrsna conscious and act accordingly.Lust is only the perverted reflection of love of God which is naturalfor every living entity. But if one is educated in Krsna consciousnessfrom the very beginning, that natural love of God cannot deteriorateinto lust. When love of God deteriorates into lust, it is verydifficult to return to the normal condition. Nonetheless, Krsnaconsciousness is so powerful that even a late beginner can become alover of God by following the regulative principles of devotionalservice. So, from any stage of life, or from the time of understandingits urgency, one can begin regulating the senses in Krsnaconsciousness, devotional service of the Lord, and turn the lust intolove of Godhead--the highest perfectional stage of human life.
TEXT 42
indriyani parany ahur
indriyebhyah param manahmanasas tu para buddhiryo buddheh paratas tu sah
SYNONYMSindriyani--senses; parani--superior; ahuh--is said; indriyebhyah--more
than the senses; param--superior; manah--the mind; manasah--more thanthe mind; tu--also; para--superior; buddhih--intelligence; yah--onewho; buddheh--more than the intelligence; paratah--superior; tu--but;sah--he.
TRANSLATION
The working senses are superior to dull matter; mind is higher than the
senses; intelligence is still higher than the mind; and he [the soul]is even higher than the intelligence.
PURPORTThe senses are different outlets for the activities of lust. Lust is
reserved within the body, but it is given vent through the senses.Therefore, the senses are superior to the body as a whole. Theseoutlets are not in use when there is superior consciousness, or Krsnaconsciousness. In Krsna consciousness the soul makes direct connectionwith the Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore the bodilyfunctions, as described here, ultimately end in the Supreme Soul.Bodily action means the functions of the senses, and stopping thesenses means stopping all bodily actions. But since the mind is active,then, even though the body may be silent and at rest, the mind willact--as it does during dreaming. But, above the mind there is thedetermination of the intelligence, and above the intelligence is thesoul proper. If, therefore, the soul is directly engaged with theSupreme, naturally all other subordinates, namely, the intelligence,mind and the senses, will be automatically engaged. In the KathaUpanisad there is a passage, in which it is said that the objects ofsense gratification are superior to the senses, and mind is superior tothe sense objects. If, therefore, the mind is directly engaged in theservice of the Lord constantly, then there is no chance of the sensesbecoming engaged in other ways. This mental attitude has already beenexplained. If the mind is engaged in the transcendental service of theLord, there is no chance of its being engaged in the lowerpropensities. In the Katha Upanisad the soul has been described asmahan, the great. Therefore the soul is above all--namely, the senseobjects, the senses, the mind and the intelligence. Therefore, directlyunderstanding the constitutional position of the soul is the solutionof the whole problem.With intelligence one has to seek out the constitutional position ofthe soul and then engage the mind always in Krsna consciousness. Thatsolves the whole problem. A neophyte spiritualist is generally advisedto keep aloof from the objects of the senses. One has to strengthen themind by use of intelligence. If by intelligence one engages one's mindin Krsna consciousness, by complete surrender unto the SupremePersonality of Godhead, then, automatically, the mind becomes stronger,and even though the senses are very strong, like serpents, they will beno more effective than serpents with broken fangs. But even though thesoul is the master of intelligence and mind, and the senses also,still, unless it is strengthened by association with Krsna in Krsnaconsciousness, there is every chance of falling down due to theagitated mind.
TEXT 43
evam buddheh param buddhva
samstabhyatmanam atmanajahi satrum maha-bahokama-rupam durasadam
SYNONYMS
evam--thus; buddheh--of intelligence; param--superior; buddhva--so
knowing; samstabhya--by steadying; atmanam--of the mind; atmana--bydeliberate intelligence; jahi--conquer; satrum--the enemy; maha-baho--Omighty-armed one; kama-rupam--the form of lust; durasadam--formidable.
TRANSLATIONThus knowing oneself to be transcendental to material senses, mind and
intelligence, one should control the lower self by the higher self andthus--by spiritual strength--conquer this insatiable enemy known aslust.
PURPORTThis Third Chapter of the Bhagavad-gita is conclusively directive to
Krsna consciousness by knowing oneself as the eternal servitor of theSupreme Personality of Godhead, without considering impersonal voidnessas the ultimate end. In the material existence of life, one iscertainly influenced by propensities for lust and desire for dominatingthe resources of material nature. Desire for overlording and sensegratification are the greatest enemies of the conditioned soul; but bythe strength of Krsna consciousness, one can control the materialsenses, the mind and the intelligence. One may not give up work andprescribed duties all of a sudden; but by gradually developing Krsnaconsciousness, one can be situated in a transcendental position withoutbeing influenced by the material senses and the mind--by steadyintelligence directed toward one's pure identity. This is the sum totalof this chapter. In the immature stage of material existence,philosophical speculations and artificial attempts to control thesenses by the so-called practice of yogic postures can never help a mantoward spiritual life. He must be trained in Krsna consciousness byhigher intelligence.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Third Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Karma-yoga, or the Discharge of One'sPrescribed Duty in Krsna Consciousness.
“Bhagavad-gita As It Is ” by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of
this book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended forpersonal non-commercial use only, under the “fair use” guidelinesestablished by international copyright laws. You may use thiselectronic file to evaluate the printed version of this book, for yourown private use, or for short excerpts used in academic works,research, student papers, presentations, and the like. You candistribute this evaluation copy to others over the Internet, so long asyou keep this copyright information intact. You may not reproduce morethan ten percent (10%) of this book in any media without the expresswritten permission from the copyright holders. Reference any excerptsin the following way: “Excerpted from “Bhagavad-gita As It Is” by A.C.Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta BookTrust International, www.Krishna.com .”
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1972-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.
All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or to
evaluate dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website ofthe publishers, www.Krishna.com .
Chapter 4
Transcendental Knowledge
TEXT 1
sri-bhagavan uvaca
imam vivasvate yogamproktavan aham avyayamvivasvan manave prahamanur iksvakave 'bravit
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; imam--
this; vivasvate--unto the sun-god; yogam--the science of one'srelationship to the Supreme; proktavan--instructed; aham--I; avyayam--imperishable; vivasvan--Vivasvan (the sun-god's name); manave--unto thefather of mankind (of the name Vaivasvata); praha--told; manuh--thefather of mankind; iksvakave--unto King Iksvaku; abravit--said.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: I instructed this imperishable science of yoga
to the sun-god, Vivasvan, and Vivasvan instructed it to Manu, thefather of mankind, and Manu in turn instructed it to Iksvaku.
PURPORTHerein we find the history of the Bhagavad-gita traced from a remote
time when it was delivered to the royal order, the Kings of allplanets. This science is especially meant for the protection of theinhabitants, and therefore the royal order should understand it inorder to be able to rule the citizens and protect them from thematerial bondage to lust. Human life is meant for cultivation ofspiritual knowledge, in eternal relationship with the SupremePersonality of Godhead, and the executive heads of all states and allplanets are obliged to impart this lesson to the citizens by education,culture and devotion. In other words, the executive heads of all statesare intended to spread the science of Krsna consciousness so that thepeople may take advantage of this great science and pursue a successfulpath, utilizing the opportunity of the human form of life.In this millennium, the sun-god is known as Vivasvan, the king of thesun, which is the origin of all planets within the solar system. In theBrahma-samhita (5.52) it is stated:
yac-caksur esa savita sakala-grahanam
raja samasta-sura-murtir asesa-tejahyasyajnaya bhramati sambhrta-kala-cakrogovindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami
"Let me worship," Lord Brahma said, "the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Govinda [Krsna], who is the original person and under whoseorder the sun, which is the king of all planets, is assuming immensepower and heat. The sun represents the eye of the Lord and traversesits orbit in obedience to His order."The sun is the king of the planets, and the sun-god (at present of thename Vivasvan) rules the sun planet, which is controlling all otherplanets by supplying heat and light. He is rotating under the order ofKrsna, and Lord Krsna originally made Vivasvan His first disciple tounderstand the science of Bhagavad-gita. The Gita is not, therefore, aspeculative treatise for the insignificant mundane scholar but is astandard book of knowledge coming down from time immemorial.In the Mahabharata (Santi-parva 348.51-52) we can trace out the historyof the Gita as follows:
treta-yugadau ca tato
vivasvan manave dadaumanus ca loka-bhrty-arthamsutayeksvakave dadau
iksvakuna ca kathito
vyapya lokan avasthitah
"In the beginning of the Treta-yuga [millennium] this science of the
relationship with the Supreme was delivered by Vivasvan to Manu. Manu,being the father of mankind, gave it to his son Maharaja Iksvaku, theking of this earth planet and forefather of the Raghu dynasty in whichLord Ramacandra appeared." Therefore, Bhagavad-gita existed in thehuman society from the time of Maharaja Iksvaku.At the present moment we have just passed through five thousand yearsof the Kali-yuga, which lasts 432,000 years. Before this there was theDvapara-yuga (800,000 years), and before that there was Treta-yuga(1,200,000 years). Thus, some 2,005,000 years ago, Manu spoke theBhagavad-gita to his disciple and son Maharaja Iksvaku, the king ofthis planet earth. The age of the current Manu is calculated to lastsome 305,300,000 years, of which 120,400,000 have passed. Acceptingthat before the birth of Manu the Gita was spoken by the Lord to Hisdisciple the sun-god Vivasvan, a rough estimate is that the Gita wasspoken at least 120,400,000 years ago; and in human society it has beenextant for two million years. It was respoken by the Lord again toArjuna about five thousand years ago. That is the rough estimate of thehistory of the Gita, according to the Gita itself and according to theversion of the speaker, Lord Sri Krsna. It was spoken to the sun-godVivasvan because he is also a ksatriya and is the father of allksatriyas who are descendants of the sun-god, or the surya-vamsaksatriyas. Because Bhagavad-gita is as good as the Vedas, being spokenby the Supreme Personality of Godhead, this knowledge is apauruseya,superhuman. Since the Vedic instructions are accepted as they are,without human interpretation, the Gita must therefore be acceptedwithout mundane interpretation. The mundane wranglers may speculate onthe Gita in their own ways, but that is not Bhagavad-gita as it is.Therefore, Bhagavad-gita has to be accepted as it is, from thedisciplic succession, and it is described herein that the Lord spoke tothe sun-god, the sun-god spoke to his son Manu, and Manu spoke to hisson Iksvaku.
TEXT 2
evam parampara-praptam
imam rajarsayo viduhsa kaleneha mahatayogo nastah parantapa
SYNONYMSevam--thus; parampara--disciplic succession; praptam--received; imam--
this science; raja-rsayah--the saintly kings; viduh--understood; sah--that knowledge; kalena--in the course of time; iha--in this world;mahata--by great; yogah--the science of one's relationship with theSupreme; nastah--scattered; parantapa--O Arjuna, subduer of theenemies.
TRANSLATIONThis supreme science was thus received through the chain of disciplic
succession, and the saintly kings understood it in that way. But incourse of time the succession was broken, and therefore the science asit is appears to be lost.
PURPORTIt is clearly stated that the Gita was especially meant for the saintly
kings because they were to execute its purpose in ruling over thecitizens. Certainly Bhagavad-gita was never meant for the demonicpersons, who would dissipate its value for no one's benefit and woulddevise all types of interpretations according to personal whims. Assoon as the original purpose was scattered by the motives of theunscrupulous commentators, there arose the need to reestablish thedisciplic succession. Five thousand years ago it was detected by theLord Himself that the disciplic succession was broken, and therefore Hedeclared that the purpose of the Gita appeared to be lost. In the sameway, at the present moment also there are so many editions of the Gita(especially in English), but almost all of them are not according toauthorized disciplic succession. There are innumerable interpretationsrendered by different mundane scholars, but almost all of them do notaccept the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, although they make agood business on the words of Sri Krsna. This spirit is demonic,because demons do not believe in God but simply enjoy the property ofthe Supreme. Since there is a great need of an edition of the Gita inEnglish, as it is received by the parampara (disciplic succession)system, an attempt is made herewith to fulfill this great want.Bhagavad-gita--accepted as it is--is a great boon to humanity; but ifit is accepted as a treatise of philosophical speculations, it issimply a waste of time.
TEXT 3
sa evayam maya te 'dya
yogah proktah puratanahbhakto 'si me sakha cetirahasyam hy etad uttamam
SYNONYMS
sah--the same ancient; eva--certainly; ayam--this; maya--by Me; te--
unto you; adya--today; yogah--the science of yoga; proktah--spoken;puratanah--very old; bhaktah--devotee; asi--you are; me--My; sakha--friend; ca--also; iti--therefore; rahasyam--mystery; hi--certainly;etat--this; uttamam--transcendental.
TRANSLATIONThat very ancient science of the relationship with the Supreme is today
told by Me to you because you are My devotee as well as My friend;therefore you can understand the transcendental mystery of thisscience.
PURPORTThere are two classes of men, namely the devotee and the demon. The
Lord selected Arjuna as the recipient of this great science owing tohis being a devotee of the Lord, but for the demon it is not possibleto understand this great mysterious science. There are a number ofeditions of this great book of knowledge, and some of them havecommentaries by the devotees and some of them have commentaries by thedemons. Commentation by the devotees is real, whereas that of the demonis useless. Arjuna accepts Sri Krsna as the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, and any commentary on the Gita following in the footsteps ofArjuna is real devotional service to the cause of this great science.The demonic, however, concoct something about Krsna and mislead thepublic and the general readers from the path of Krsna's instructions.One should try to follow the disciplic succession from Arjuna, and thusbe benefited.
TEXT 4
arjuna uvaca
aparam bhavato janmaparam janma vivasvatahkatham etad vijaniyamtvam adau proktavan iti
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; aparam--junior; bhavatah--Your; janma--
birth; param--superior; janma--birth; vivasvatah--of the sun-god;katham--how; etat--this; vijaniyam--shall I understand; tvam--You;adau--in the beginning; proktavan--instructed; iti--thus.
TRANSLATIONArjuna said: The sun-god Vivasvan is senior by birth to You. How am I
to understand that in the beginning You instructed this science to him?
PURPORTArjuna is an accepted devotee of the Lord, so how could he not believe
Krsna's words? The fact is that Arjuna is not inquiring for himself butfor those who do not believe in the Supreme Personality of Godhead orfor the demons who do not like the idea that Krsna should be acceptedas the Supreme Personality of Godhead; for them only Arjuna inquires onthis point, as if he were himself not aware of the Personality of
Godhead, or Krsna. As it will be evident from the Tenth Chapter, Arjuna
knew perfectly well that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,the fountainhead of everything and the last word in transcendence. Ofcourse, Krsna also appeared as the son of Devaki on this earth. HowKrsna remained the same Supreme Personality of Godhead, the eternaloriginal person, is very difficult for an ordinary man to understand.Therefore, to clarify this point, Arjuna put this question before Krsnaso that He Himself could speak authoritatively. That Krsna is thesupreme authority is accepted by the whole world, not only at present,but from time immemorial, and the demons alone reject Him. Anyway,since Krsna is the authority accepted by all, Arjuna put this questionbefore Him in order that Krsna would describe Himself without beingdepicted by the demons who always try to distort Him in a wayunderstandable to the demons and their followers. It is necessary thateveryone, for his own interest, know the science of Krsna. Therefore,when Krsna Himself speaks about Himself, it is auspicious for all theworlds. To the demons, such explanations by Krsna Himself may appear tobe strange because the demons always study Krsna from their ownstandpoint, but those who are devotees heartily welcome the statementsof Krsna when they are spoken by Krsna Himself. The devotees willalways worship such authoritative statements of Krsna because they arealways eager to know more and more about Him. The atheists, whoconsider Krsna an ordinary man, may in this way come to know that Krsnais superhuman, that He is sac-cid-ananda-vigraha--the eternal form ofbliss and knowledge--that He is transcendental, and that He is abovethe domination of the modes of material nature and above the influenceof time and space. A devotee of Krsna, like Arjuna, is undoubtedlyabove any misunderstanding of the transcendental position of Krsna.Arjuna's putting this question before the Lord is simply an attempt bythe devotee to defy the atheistic attitude of persons who considerKrsna to be an ordinary human being, subject to the modes of materialnature.
TEXT 5
sri-bhagavan uvaca
bahuni me vyatitanijanmani tava carjunatany aham veda sarvanina tvam vettha parantapa
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Personality of Godhead said; bahuni--many; me--
of Mine; vyatitani--have passed; janmani--births; tava--of yours; ca--and also; arjuna--O Arjuna; tani--all those; aham--I; veda--do know;sarvani--all; na--not; tvam--yourself; vettha--know; parantapa--Osubduer of the enemy.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: Many, many births both you and I have passed. I
can remember all of them, but you cannot, O subduer of the enemy!
PURPORTIn the Brahma-samhita (5.33) we have information of many, many
incarnations of the Lord. It is stated there:
advaitam acyutam anadim ananta-rupam
adyam purana-purusam nava-yauvanam cavedesu durlabham adurlabham atma-bhaktaugovindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami
"I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda [Krsna], who is
the original person--absolute, infallible, without beginning. Althoughexpanded into unlimited forms, still the same original, the oldest, andthe person always appearing as a fresh youth. Such eternal, blissful,all-knowing forms of the Lord are usually understood by the best Vedicscholars, but they are always manifest to pure, unalloyed devotees."It is also stated in Brahma-samhita (5.39):
ramadi-murtisu kala-niyamena tisthan
nanavataram akarod bhuvanesu kintukrsnah svayam samabhavat paramah puman yogovindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami
"I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda [Krsna], who is
always situated in various incarnations such as Rama, Nrsimha and manysubincarnations as well, but who is the original Personality of Godheadknown as Krsna, and who incarnates personally also."In the Vedas also it is said that the Lord, although one without asecond, manifests Himself in innumerable forms. He is like the vaiduryastone, which changes color yet still remains one. All those multiformsare understood by the pure, unalloyed devotees, but not by a simplestudy of the Vedas (vedesu durlabham adurlabham atma-bhaktau). Devoteeslike Arjuna are constant companions of the Lord, and whenever the Lordincarnates, the associate devotees also incarnate in order to serve theLord in different capacities. Arjuna is one of these devotees, and inthis verse it is understood that some millions of years ago when LordKrsna spoke the Bhagavad-gita to the sun-god Vivasvan, Arjuna, in adifferent capacity, was also present. But the difference between theLord and Arjuna is that the Lord remembered the incident whereas Arjunacould not remember. That is the difference between the part-and-parcelliving entity and the Supreme Lord. Although Arjuna is addressed hereinas the mighty hero who could subdue the enemies, he is unable to recallwhat had happened in his various past births. Therefore, a livingentity, however great he may be in the material estimation, can neverequal the Supreme Lord. Anyone who is a constant companion of the Lordis certainly a liberated person, but he cannot be equal to the Lord.The Lord is described in the Brahma-samhita as infallible (acyuta),which means that He never forgets Himself, even though He is inmaterial contact. Therefore, the Lord and the living entity can neverbe equal in all respects, even if the living entity is as liberated asArjuna. Although Arjuna is a devotee of the Lord, he sometimes forgetsthe nature of the Lord, but by the divine grace a devotee can at onceunderstand the infallible condition of the Lord, whereas a nondevoteeor a demon cannot understand this transcendental nature. Consequentlythese descriptions in the Gita cannot be understood by demonic brains.Krsna remembered acts which were performed by Him millions of yearsbefore, but Arjuna could not, despite the fact that both Krsna andArjuna are eternal in nature. We may also note herein that a livingentity forgets everything due to his change of body, but the Lordremembers because He does not change His sac-cid-ananda body. He isadvaita, which means there is no distinction between His body andHimself. Everything in relation to Him is spirit--whereas the
conditioned soul is different from his material body. And, because the
Lord's body and self are identical, His position is always differentfrom the ordinary living entity, even when He descends to the materialplatform. The demons cannot adjust themselves to this transcendentalnature of the Lord, which the Lord Himself explains in the followingverse.
TEXT 6
ajo 'pi sann avyayatma
bhutanam isvaro 'pi sanprakrtim svam adhisthayasambhavamy atma-mayaya
SYNONYMSajah--unborn; api--although; san--being so; avyaya--without
deterioration; atma--body; bhutanam--all those who are born; isvarah--the Supreme Lord; api--although; san--being so; prakrtim--transcendental form; svam--of Myself; adhisthaya--being so situated;sambhavami--I do incarnate; atma-mayaya--by My internal energy.
TRANSLATIONAlthough I am unborn and My transcendental body never deteriorates, and
although I am the Lord of all sentient beings, I still appear in everymillennium in My original transcendental form.
PURPORTThe Lord has spoken about the peculiarity of His birth: although He may
appear like an ordinary person, He remembers everything of His many,many past "births," whereas a common man cannot remember what he hasdone even a few hours before. If someone is asked what he did exactlyat the same time one day earlier, it would be very difficult for acommon man to answer immediately. He would surely have to dredge hismemory to recall what he was doing exactly at the same time one daybefore. And yet, men often dare claim to be God, or Krsna. One shouldnot be misled by such meaningless claims. Then again, the Lord explainsHis prakrti, or His form. Prakrti means nature, as well as svarupa, orone's own form. The Lord says that He appears in His own body. He doesnot change His body, as the common living entity changes from one bodyto another. The conditioned soul may have one kind of body in thepresent birth, but he has a different body in the next birth. In thematerial world, the living entity has no fixed body but transmigratesfrom one body to another. The Lord, however, does not do so. WheneverHe appears, He does so in the same original body, by His internalpotency. In other words, Krsna appears in this material world in Hisoriginal eternal form, with two hands, holding a flute. He appearsexactly in His eternal body, uncontaminated by this material world.Although He appears in the same transcendental body and is Lord of theuniverse, it still appears that He takes His birth like an ordinaryliving entity. Despite the fact Lord Krsna grows from childhood toboyhood and from boyhood to youth, astonishingly enough He never agesbeyond youth. At the time of the Battle of Kuruksetra, He had manygrandchildren at home; or, in other words, He had sufficiently aged bymaterial calculations. Still He looked just like a young man twenty ortwenty-five years old. We never see a picture of Krsna in old age
because He never grows old like us, although He is the oldest person in
the whole creation--past, present, and future. Neither His body nor Hisintelligence ever deteriorates or changes. Therefore, it is clear thatin spite of His being in the material world, He is the same unborn,eternal form of bliss and knowledge, changeless in His transcendentalbody and intelligence. Factually, His appearance and disappearance islike the sun's rising, moving before us, and then disappearing from oureyesight. When the sun is out of sight, we think that the sun is set,and when the sun is before our eyes, we think that the sun is on thehorizon. Actually, the sun is always in its fixed position, but owingto our defective, insufficient senses, we calculate the appearance anddisappearance of the sun in the sky. And, because His appearance anddisappearance are completely different from that of any ordinary,common living entity, it is evident that He is eternal, blissfulknowledge by His internal potency--and He is never contaminated bymaterial nature. The Vedas also confirm that the Supreme Personality ofGodhead is unborn, yet He still appears to take His birth in multi-manifestations. The Vedic supplementary literatures also confirm thateven though the Lord appears to be taking His birth, He is stillwithout change of body. In the Bhagavatam, He appears before His motheras Narayana, with four hands and the decorations of the six kinds offull opulences. His appearance in His original eternal form is Hiscauseless mercy, according to the Visva-kosa dictionary. The Lord isconscious of all of His previous appearances and disappearances, but acommon living entity forgets everything about his past body as soon ashe gets another body. He is the Lord of all living entities because Heperforms wonderful and superhuman activities while He is on this earth.Therefore, the Lord is always the same Absolute Truth and is withoutdifferentiation between His form and self, or between His quality andbody. A question may now be raised as to why the Lord appears anddisappears in this world. This is explained in the next verse.
TEXT 7
yada yada hi dharmasya
glanir bhavati bharataabhyutthanam adharmasyatadatmanam srjamy aham
SYNONYMSyada--whenever; yada--wherever; hi--certainly; dharmasya--of religion;
glanih--discrepancies; bhavati--manifested, becomes; bharata--Odescendant of Bharata; abhyutthanam--predominance; adharmasya--ofirreligion; tada--at that time; atmanam--self; srjami--manifest; aham--I.
TRANSLATIONWhenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O
descendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion--at thattime I descend Myself.
PURPORTThe word srjami is significant herein. Srjami cannot be used in the
sense of creation, because, according to the previous verse, there isno creation of the Lord's form or body, since all of the forms are
eternally existent. Therefore, srjami means that the Lord manifests
Himself as He is. Although the Lord appears on schedule, namely at theend of the Dvapara-yuga of the twenty-eighth millennium of the seventhManu in one day of Brahma, still He has no obligation to adhere to suchrules and regulations, because He is completely free to act in manyways at His will. He therefore appears by His own will whenever thereis a predominance of irreligiosity and a disappearance of truereligion. Principles of religion are laid down in the Vedas, and anydiscrepancy in the matter of properly executing the rules of the Vedasmakes one irreligious. In the Bhagavatam it is stated that suchprinciples are the laws of the Lord. Only the Lord can manufacture asystem of religion. The Vedas are also accepted as originally spoken bythe Lord Himself to Brahma, from within his heart. Therefore, theprinciples of dharma, or religion, are the direct orders of the SupremePersonality of Godhead (dharmam tu saksad bhagavat-pranitam). Theseprinciples are clearly indicated throughout the Bhagavad-gita. Thepurpose of the Vedas is to establish such principles under the order ofthe Supreme Lord, and the Lord directly orders, at the end of the Gita,that the highest principle of religion is to surrender unto Him only,and nothing more. The Vedic principles push one towards completesurrender unto Him; and, whenever such principles are disturbed by thedemoniac, the Lord appears. From the Bhagavatam we understand that LordBuddha is the incarnation of Krsna who appeared when materialism wasrampant and materialists were using the pretext of the authority of theVedas. Although there are certain restrictive rules and regulationsregarding animal sacrifice for particular purposes in the Vedas, peopleof demonic tendency still took to animal sacrifice without reference tothe Vedic principles. Lord Buddha appeared to stop this nonsense and toestablish the Vedic principles of nonviolence. Therefore each and everyavatara, or incarnation of the Lord, has a particular mission, and theyare all described in the revealed scriptures. No one should be acceptedas an avatara unless he is referred to by scriptures. It is not a factthat the Lord appears only on Indian soil. He can advent Himselfanywhere and everywhere, and whenever He desires to appear. In each andevery incarnation, He speaks as much about religion as can beunderstood by the particular people under their particularcircumstances. But the mission is the same--to lead people to Godconsciousness and obedience to the principles of religion. Sometimes Hedescends personally, and sometimes He sends His bona fiderepresentative in the form of His son, or servant, or Himself in somedisguised form.The principles of Bhagavad-gita were spoken to Arjuna, and, for thatmatter, to other highly elevated persons, because he was highlyadvanced compared to ordinary persons in other parts of the world. Twoplus two equals four is a mathematical principle that is true both inthe beginner's arithmetic class and in the advanced class as well.Still, there are higher and lower mathematics. In all incarnations ofthe Lord, therefore, the same principles are taught, but they appear tobe higher and lower in varied circumstances. The higher principles ofreligion begin with the acceptance of the four orders and the fourstatuses of social life, as will be explained later. The whole purposeof the mission of incarnations is to arouse Krsna consciousnesseverywhere. Such consciousness is manifest and nonmanifest only underdifferent circumstances.
TEXT 8
paritranaya sadhunam
vinasaya ca duskrtam
dharma-samsthapanarthayasambhavami yuge yuge
SYNONYMSparitranaya--for the deliverance; sadhunam--of the devotees; vinasaya--
for the annihilation; ca--also; duskrtam--of the miscreants; dharma--principles of religion; samsthapana-arthaya--to reestablish;sambhavami--I do appear; yuge--millennium; yuge--after millennium.
TRANSLATIONIn order to deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as well
as to reestablish the principles of religion, I advent Myself,millennium after millennium.
PURPORTAccording to Bhagavad-gita, a sadhu (holy man) is a man in Krsna
consciousness. A person may appear to be irreligious, but if he has thequalifications of Krsna consciousness wholly and fully, he is to beunderstood to be a sadhu. And duskrtam applies to one who doesn't carefor Krsna consciousness. Such miscreants, or duskrtam, are described asfoolish and the lowest of mankind, even though they may be decoratedwith mundane education; whereas another person, who is one hundredpercent engaged in Krsna consciousness, is accepted as a sadhu, eventhough such a person may be neither learned nor well cultured. As faras the atheistic are concerned, it is not necessary for the SupremeLord to appear as He is to destroy them, as He did with the demonsRavana and Kamsa. The Lord has many agents who are quite competent tovanquish demons. But the Lord especially descends to appease Hisunalloyed devotees, who are always harassed by the demoniac. The demonharasses the devotee, even though the latter may happen to be his kin.Although Prahlada Maharaja was the son of Hiranyakasipu, he wasnonetheless persecuted by his father; although Devaki, the mother ofKrsna, was the sister of Kamsa, she and her husband Vasudeva werepersecuted only because Krsna was to be born of them. So Lord Krsnaappeared primarily to deliver Devaki, rather than kill Kamsa, but bothwere performed simultaneously. Therefore it is said here that todeliver the devotee and vanquish the demon miscreants, the Lord appearsin different incarnations.In the Caitanya-caritamrta of Krsnadasa Kaviraja, the following verses(Madhya 20.263-264) summarize these principles of incarnation:
srsti-hetu yei murti prapance avatare
sei isvara-murti 'avatara' nama dhare
mayatita paravyome sabara avasthana
visve avatari' dhare 'avatara' nama
"The avatara, or incarnation of Godhead, descends from the kingdom of
God for material manifestation. And the particular form of thePersonality of Godhead who so descends is called an incarnation, oravatara. Such incarnations are situated in the spiritual world, thekingdom of God. When they descend to the material creation, they assumethe name avatara."
There are various kinds of avataras, such as purusavataras,
gunavataras, lilavataras, sakty-avesa avataras, manvantara-avataras andyugavataras--all appearing on schedule all over the universe. But LordKrsna is the primeval Lord, the fountainhead of all avataras. Lord SriKrsna descends for the specific purpose of mitigating the anxieties ofthe pure devotees, who are very anxious to see Him in His originalVrndavana pastimes. Therefore, the prime purpose of the Krsna avatarais to satisfy His unalloyed devotees.The Lord says that He incarnates Himself in every millennium. Thisindicates that He incarnates also in the Age of Kali. As stated in theSrimad-Bhagavatam, the incarnation in the Age of Kali is Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu, who spread the worship of Krsna by the sankirtana movement(congregational chanting of the holy names) and spread Krsnaconsciousness throughout India. He predicted that this culture ofsankirtana would be broadcast all over the world, from town to town andvillage to village. Lord Caitanya as the incarnation of Krsna, thePersonality of Godhead, is described secretly but not directly in theconfidential parts of the revealed scriptures, such as the Upanisads,Mahabharata, Bhagavatam, etc. The devotees of Lord Krsna are muchattracted by the sankirtana movement of Lord Caitanya. This avatara ofthe Lord does not kill the miscreants, but delivers them by Hiscauseless mercy.
TEXT 9
janma karma ca me divyam
evam yo vetti tattvatahtyaktva deham punar janmanaiti mam eti so 'rjuna
SYNONYMSjanma--birth; karma--work; ca--also; me--of Mine; divyam--
transcendental; evam--like this; yah--anyone who; vetti--knows;tattvatah--in reality; tyaktva--leaving aside; deham--this body; punah--again; janma--birth; na--never; eti--does attain; mam--unto Me; eti--does attain; sah--he; arjuna--O Arjuna.
TRANSLATIONOne who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities
does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this materialworld, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna.
PURPORTThe Lord's descent from His transcendental abode is already explained
in the 6th verse. One who can understand the truth of the appearance ofthe Personality of Godhead is already liberated from material bondage,and therefore he returns to the kingdom of God immediately afterquitting this present material body. Such liberation of the livingentity from material bondage is not at all easy. The impersonalists andthe yogis attain liberation only after much trouble and many, manybirths. Even then, the liberation they achieve--merging into theimpersonal brahmajyoti of the Lord--is only partial, and there is therisk of returning again to this material world. But the devotee, simplyby understanding the transcendental nature of the body and activitiesof the Lord, attains the abode of the Lord after ending this body and
does not run the risk of returning again to this material world. In the
Brahma-samhita (5.33) it is stated that the Lord has many, many formsand incarnations: advaitam acyutam anadim ananta-rupam. Although thereare many transcendental forms of the Lord, they are still one and thesame Supreme Personality of Godhead. One has to understand this factwith conviction, although it is incomprehensible to mundane scholarsand empiric philosophers. As stated in the Vedas (Purusa-bodhiniUpanisad):
eko devo nitya-lilanurakto
bhakta-vyapi hrdy antar-atma
"The one Supreme Personality of Godhead is eternally engaged in many,
many transcendental forms in relationships with His unalloyeddevotees." This Vedic version is confirmed in this verse of the Gitapersonally by the Lord. He who accepts this truth on the strength ofthe authority of the Vedas and of the Supreme Personality of Godheadand who does not waste time in philosophical speculations attains thehighest perfectional stage of liberation. Simply by accepting thistruth on faith, one can, without a doubt, attain liberation. The Vedicversion, tat tvam asi, is actually applied in this case. Anyone whounderstands Lord Krsna to be the Supreme, or who says unto the Lord"You are the same Supreme Brahman, the Personality of Godhead," iscertainly liberated instantly, and consequently his entrance into thetranscendental association of the Lord is guaranteed. In other words,such a faithful devotee of the Lord attains perfection, and this isconfirmed by the following Vedic assertion:(Svetasvatara Upanisad 3.8)
tam eva viditvati mrtyum eti
nanyah pantha vidyate 'yanaya
One can attain the perfect stage of liberation from birth and death
simply by knowing the Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thereis no alternative because anyone who does not understand Lord Krsna asthe Supreme Personality of Godhead is surely in the mode of ignorance.Consequently he will not attain salvation simply, so to speak, bylicking the outer surface of the bottle of honey, or by interpretingthe Bhagavad-gita according to mundane scholarship. Such empiricphilosophers may assume very important roles in the material world, butthey are not necessarily eligible for liberation. Such puffed-upmundane scholars have to wait for the causeless mercy of the devotee ofthe Lord. One should therefore cultivate Krsna consciousness with faithand knowledge, and in this way attain perfection.
TEXT 10
vita-raga-bhaya-krodha
man-maya mam upasritahbahavo jnana-tapasaputa mad-bhavam agatah
SYNONYMSvita--freed from; raga--attachment; bhaya--fear; krodhah--anger; mat-
maya--fully in Me; mam--unto Me; upasritah--being fully situated;bahavah--many; jnana--knowledge; tapasa--by penance; putah--beingpurified; mat-bhavam--transcendental love for Me; agatah--attained.
TRANSLATION
Being freed from attachment, fear and anger, being fully absorbed in Me
and taking refuge in Me, many, many persons in the past became purifiedby knowledge of Me--and thus they all attained transcendental love forMe.
PURPORTAs described above, it is very difficult for a person who is too
materially affected to understand the personal nature of the SupremeAbsolute Truth. Generally, people who are attached to the bodilyconception of life are so absorbed in materialism that it is almostimpossible for them to understand that there is a transcendental bodywhich is imperishable, full of knowledge and eternally blissful. In thematerialistic concept, the body is perishable, full of ignorance andcompletely miserable. Therefore, people in general keep this samebodily idea in mind when they are informed of the personal form of theLord. For such materialistic men, the form of the gigantic materialmanifestation is supreme. Consequently they consider the Supreme to beimpersonal. And because they are too materially absorbed, theconception of retaining the personality after liberation from matterfrightens them. When they are informed that spiritual life is alsoindividual and personal, they become afraid of becoming persons again,and so they naturally prefer a kind of merging into the impersonalvoid. Generally, they compare the living entities to the bubbles of theocean, which merge into the ocean. That is the highest perfection ofspiritual existence attainable without individual personality. This isa kind of fearful stage of life, devoid of perfect knowledge ofspiritual existence. Furthermore there are many persons who cannotunderstand spiritual existence at all. Being embarrassed by so manytheories and by contradictions of various types of philosophicalspeculation, they become disgusted or angry and foolishly conclude thatthere is no supreme cause and that everything is ultimately void. Suchpeople are in a diseased condition of life. Some people are toomaterially attached and therefore do not give attention to spirituallife, some of them want to merge into the supreme spiritual cause, andsome of them disbelieve in everything, being angry at all sorts ofspiritual speculation out of hopelessness. This last class of men taketo the shelter of some kind of intoxication, and their affectivehallucinations are sometimes accepted as spiritual vision. One has toget rid of all three stages of attachment to the material world,negligence of spiritual life, fear of a spiritual personal identity,and the conception of void that underlies the frustration of life. Toget free from these three stages of the material concept of life, onehas to take complete shelter of the Lord, guided by the bona fidespiritual master, and follow the disciplines and regulative principlesof devotional life. The last stage of the devotional life is calledbhava, or transcendental love of Godhead.According to Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.4.15-16), the science ofdevotional service:
adau sraddha tatah sadhu-
sango 'tha bhajana-kriyatato 'nartha-nivrttih syattato nistha rucis tatah
athasaktis tato bhavas
tatah premabhyudancati
sadhakanam ayam premnahpradurbhave bhavet kramah
"In the beginning one must have a preliminary desire for self-
realization. This will bring one to the stage of trying to associatewith persons who are spiritually elevated. In the next stage onebecomes initiated by an elevated spiritual master, and under hisinstruction the neophyte devotee begins the process of devotionalservice. By execution of devotional service under the guidance of thespiritual master, one becomes free from all material attachment,attains steadiness in self-realization, and acquires a taste forhearing about the Absolute Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna. Thistaste leads one further forward to attachment for Krsna consciousness,which is matured in bhava, or the preliminary stage of transcendentallove of God. Real love for God is called prema, the highestperfectional stage of life." In the prema stage there is constantengagement in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. So, by theslow process of devotional service, under the guidance of the bona fidespiritual master, one can attain the highest stage, being freed fromall material attachment, from the fearfulness of one's individualspiritual personality, and from the frustrations resulting from voidphilosophy. Then one can ultimately attain to the abode of the SupremeLord.
TEXT 11
ye yatha mam prapadyante
tams tathaiva bhajamy ahammama vartmanuvartantemanusyah partha sarvasah
SYNONYMSye--all of them; yatha--as; mam--unto Me; prapadyante--surrender; tan--
unto them; tatha--so; eva--certainly; bhajami--do I reward; aham--I;mama--My; vartma--path; anuvartante--do follow; manusyah--all men;partha--O son of Prtha; sarvasah--in all respects.
TRANSLATIONAll of them--as they surrender unto Me--I reward accordingly. Everyone
follows My path in all respects, O son of Prtha.
PURPORTEveryone is searching for Krsna in the different aspects of His
manifestations. Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is partiallyrealized in His impersonal brahmajyoti effulgence and as the all-pervading Supersoul dwelling within everything, including the particlesof atoms. But Krsna is only fully realized by His pure devotees.Consequently, Krsna is the object of everyone's realization, and thusanyone and everyone is satisfied according to one's desire to have Him.In the transcendental world also, Krsna reciprocates with His puredevotees in the transcendental attitude, just as the devotee wants Him.One devotee may want Krsna as supreme master, another as his personalfriend, another as his son, and still another as his lover. Krsnarewards all the devotees equally, according to their different
intensities of love for Him. In the material world, the same
reciprocations of feelings are there, and they are equally exchanged bythe Lord with the different types of worshipers. The pure devotees bothhere and in the transcendental abode associate with Him in person andare able to render personal service to the Lord and thus derivetranscendental bliss in His loving service. As for those who areimpersonalists and who want to commit spiritual suicide by annihilatingthe individual existence of the living entity, Krsna helps also byabsorbing them into His effulgence. Such impersonalists do not agree toaccept the eternal, blissful Personality of Godhead; consequently theycannot relish the bliss of transcendental personal service to the Lord,having extinguished their individuality. Some of them, who are notsituated even in the impersonal existence, return to this materialfield to exhibit their dormant desires for activities. They are notadmitted into the spiritual planets, but they are again given a chanceto act on the material planets. For those who are fruitive workers, theLord awards the desired results of their prescribed duties, as theyajnesvara; and those who are yogis seeking mystic powers are awardedsuch powers. In other words, everyone is dependent for success upon Hismercy alone, and all kinds of spiritual processes are but differentdegrees of success on the same path. Unless, therefore, one comes tothe highest perfection of Krsna consciousness, all attempts remainimperfect, as is stated in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (2.3.10):
akamah sarva-kamo va
moksa-kama udara-dhihtivrena bhakti-yogenayajeta purusam param
"Whether one is without desire [the condition of the devotees], or is
desirous of all fruitive results, or is after liberation, one shouldwith all efforts try to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead forcomplete perfection, culminating in Krsna consciousness."
TEXT 12
kanksantah karmanam siddhim
yajanta iha devatahksipram hi manuse lokesiddhir bhavati karma-ja
SYNONYMSkanksantah--desiring; karmanam--of fruitive activities; siddhim--
perfection; yajante--worship by sacrifices; iha--in the material world;devatah--the demigods; ksipram--very quickly; hi--certainly; manuse--inhuman society; loke--within this world; siddhih bhavati--becomessuccessful; karma-ja--the fruitive worker.
TRANSLATIONMen in this world desire success in fruitive activities, and therefore
they worship the demigods. Quickly, of course, men get results fromfruitive work in this world.
PURPORT
There is a great misconception about the gods or demigods of this
material world, and men of less intelligence, although passing as greatscholars, take these demigods to be various forms of the Supreme Lord.Actually, the demigods are not different forms of God, but they areGod's different parts and parcels. God is one, and the parts andparcels are many. The Vedas say, nityo nityanam: God is one. Isvarahparamah krsnah. The Supreme God is one--Krsna--and the demigods aredelegated with powers to manage this material world. These demigods areall living entities (nityanam) with different grades of material power.They cannot be equal to the Supreme God--Narayana, Visnu, or Krsna.Anyone who thinks that God and the demigods are on the same level iscalled an atheist, or pasandi. Even the great demigods like Brahma andSiva cannot be compared to the Supreme Lord. In fact, the Lord isworshiped by demigods such as Brahma and Siva (siva-virinci-nutam). Yetcuriously enough there are many human leaders who are worshiped byfoolish men under the misunderstanding of anthropomorphism orzoomorphism. Iha devatah denotes a powerful man or demigod of thismaterial world. But Narayana, Visnu, or Krsna, the Supreme Personalityof Godhead, does not belong to this world. He is above, ortranscendental to, material creation. Even Sripada Sankaracarya, theleader of the impersonalists, maintains that Narayana, or Krsna, isbeyond this material creation. However, foolish people (hrta-jnana)worship the demigods because they want immediate results. They get theresults, but do not know that results so obtained are temporary and aremeant for less intelligent persons. The intelligent person is in Krsnaconsciousness, and he has no need to worship the paltry demigods forsome immediate, temporary benefit. The demigods of this material world,as well as their worshipers, will vanish with the annihilation of thismaterial world. The boons of the demigods are material and temporary.Both the material worlds and their inhabitants, including the demigods,and their worshipers, are bubbles in the cosmic ocean. In this world,however, human society is mad after temporary things such as thematerial opulence of possessing land, family and enjoyableparaphernalia. To achieve such temporary things, they worship thedemigods or powerful men in human society. If a man gets someministership in the government by worshiping a political leader, heconsiders that he has achieved a great boon. All of them are thereforekowtowing to the so-called leaders or "big guns" in order to achievetemporary boons, and they indeed achieve such things. Such foolish menare not interested in Krsna consciousness for the permanent solution tothe hardships of material existence. They are all after senseenjoyment, and to get a little facility for sense enjoyment they areattracted to worship empowered living entities known as demigods. Thisverse indicates that people are rarely interested in Krsnaconsciousness. They are mostly interested in material enjoyment, andtherefore they worship some powerful living entity.
TEXT 13
catur-varnyam maya srstam
guna-karma-vibhagasahtasya kartaram api mamviddhy akartaram avyayam
SYNONYMScatuh-varnyam--the four divisions of human society; maya--by Me;
srstam--created; guna--quality; karma--work; vibhagasah--in terms of
division; tasya--of that; kartaram--the father; api--although; mam--Me;
viddhi--you may know; akartaram--as the non-doer; avyayam--beingunchangeable.
TRANSLATIONAccording to the three modes of material nature and the work ascribed
to them, the four divisions of human society were created by Me. And,although I am the creator of this system, you should know that I am yetthe non-doer, being unchangeable.
PURPORTThe Lord is the creator of everything. Everything is born of Him,
everything is sustained by Him, and everything, after annihilation,rests in Him. He is therefore the creator of the four divisions of thesocial order, beginning with the intelligent class of men, technicallycalled brahmanas due to their being situated in the mode of goodness.Next is the administrative class, technically called the ksatriyas dueto their being situated in the mode of passion. The mercantile men,called the vaisyas, are situated in the mixed modes of passion andignorance, and the sudras, or laborer class, are situated in theignorant mode of material nature. In spite of His creating the fourdivisions of human society, Lord Krsna does not belong to any of thesedivisions, because He is not one of the conditioned souls, a section ofwhom form human society. Human society is similar to any other animalsociety, but to elevate men from the animal status, the above-mentioneddivisions are created by the Lord for the systematic development ofKrsna consciousness. The tendency of a particular man toward work isdetermined by the modes of material nature which he has acquired. Suchsymptoms of life, according to different modes of material nature, aredescribed in the Eighteenth Chapter of this book. A person in Krsnaconsciousness, however, is above even the brahmanas, because a brahmanaby quality is supposed to know about Brahman, the Supreme AbsoluteTruth. Most of them approach the impersonal Brahman manifestation ofLord Krsna, but only a man who transcends the limited knowledge of abrahmana and reaches the knowledge of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, Lord Sri Krsna, becomes a person in Krsna consciousness--or,in other words, a Vaisnava. Krsna consciousness includes knowledge ofall different plenary expansions of Krsna, namely Rama, Nrsimha,Varaha, etc. However, as Krsna is transcendental to this system of thefour divisions of human society, a person in Krsna consciousness isalso transcendental to all divisions of human society, whether weconsider the divisions of community, nation or species.
TEXT 14
na mam karmani limpanti
na me karma-phale sprhaiti mam yo 'bhijanatikarmabhir na sa badhyate
SYNONYMSna--never; mam--unto Me; karmani--all kinds of work; limpanti--do
affect; na--nor; me--My; karma-phale--in fruitive action; sprha--aspiration; iti--thus; mam--unto Me; yah--one who; abhijanati--does
know; karmabhih--by the reaction of such work; na--never does; sah--he;
badhyate--becomes entangled.
TRANSLATIONThere is no work that affects Me; nor do I aspire for the fruits of
action. One who understands this truth about Me also does not becomeentangled in the fruitive reactions of work.
PURPORTAs there are constitutional laws in the material world stating that the
king can do no wrong, or that the king is not subject to the statelaws, similarly the Lord, although He is the creator of this materialworld, is not affected by the activities of the material world. Hecreates and remains aloof from the creation, whereas the livingentities are entangled in the fruitive results of material activitiesbecause of their propensity for lording it over material resources. Theproprietor of an establishment is not responsible for the right andwrong activities of the workers, but the workers are themselvesresponsible. The living entities are engaged in their respectiveactivities of sense gratification, and these activities are notordained by the Lord. For advancement of sense gratification, theliving entities are engaged in the work of this world, and they aspireto heavenly happiness after death. The Lord, being full in Himself, hasno attraction for so-called heavenly happiness. The heavenly demigodsare only His engaged servants. The proprietor never desires the low-grade happiness such as the workers may desire. He is aloof from thematerial actions and reactions. For example, the rains are notresponsible for different types of vegetation that appear on the earth,although without such rains there is no possibility of vegetativegrowth. Vedic smrti confirms this fact as follows:
nimitta-matram evasau
srjyanam sarga-karmanipradhana-karani-bhutayato vai srjya-saktayah
"In the material creations, the Lord is only the supreme cause. The
immediate cause is material nature by which the cosmic manifestation isvisible." The created beings are of many varieties, such as thedemigods, human beings and lower animals, and all of them are subjectto the reactions of their past good or bad activities. The Lord onlygives them the proper facilities for such activities and theregulations of the modes of nature, but He is never responsible fortheir past and present activities. In the Vedanta-sutra (2.1.34) it isconfirmed, vaisamya-nairghrnye na sapeksatvat: the Lord is neverpartial to any living entity. The living entity is responsible for hisown acts. The Lord only gives him facilities, through the agency ofmaterial nature, the external energy. Anyone who is fully conversantwith all the intricacies of this law of karma, or fruitive activities,does not become affected by the results of his activities. In otherwords, the person who understands this transcendental nature of theLord is an experienced man in Krsna consciousness, and thus he is neversubjected to the laws of karma. One who does not know thetranscendental nature of the Lord and who thinks that the activities ofthe Lord are aimed at fruitive results, as are the activities of theordinary living entities, certainly becomes entangled himself in
fruitive reaction. One who knows the Supreme Truth is a liberated soul
fixed in Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 15
evam jnatva krtam karma
purvair api mumuksubhihkuru karmaiva tasmat tvampurvaih purvataram krtam
SYNONYMSevam--thus; jnatva--knowing well; krtam--performed; karma--work;
purvaih--by past authorities; api--although; mumuksubhih--who attainedliberation; kuru--just perform; karma--prescribed duty; eva--certainly;tasmat--therefore; tvam--you; purvaih--by the predecessors; purva-taram--ancient predecessors; krtam--as performed.
TRANSLATIONAll the liberated souls in ancient times acted with this understanding
and so attained liberation. Therefore, as the ancients, you shouldperform your duty in this divine consciousness.
PURPORTThere are two classes of men. Some of them are full of polluted
material things within their hearts, and some of them are materiallyfree. Krsna consciousness is equally beneficial for both of thesepersons. Those who are full of dirty things can take to the line ofKrsna consciousness for a gradual cleansing process, following theregulative principles of devotional service. Those who are alreadycleansed of the impurities may continue to act in the same Krsnaconsciousness so that others may follow their exemplary activities andthereby be benefited. Foolish persons or neophytes in Krsnaconsciousness often want to retire from activities without havingknowledge of Krsna consciousness. Arjuna's desire to retire fromactivities on the battlefield was not approved by the Lord. One needonly know how to act. To retire from the activities of Krsnaconsciousness and to sit aloof making a show of Krsna consciousness, isless important than actually engaging in the field of activities forthe sake of Krsna. Arjuna is here advised to act in Krsnaconsciousness, following in the footsteps of the Lord's previousdisciples, such as the sun-god Vivasvan, as mentioned hereinbefore. TheSupreme Lord knows all His past activities, as well as those of personswho acted in Krsna consciousness in the past. Therefore He recommendsthe acts of the sun-god, who learned this art from the Lord somemillions of years before. All such students of Lord Krsna are mentionedhere as past liberated persons, engaged in the discharge of dutiesallotted by Krsna.
TEXT 16
kim karma kim akarmeti
kavayo 'py atra mohitahtat te karma pravaksyamiyaj jnatva moksyase 'subhat
SYNONYMS
kim--what is; karma--action; kim--what is; akarma--inaction; iti--thus;
kavayah--the intelligent; api--also; atra--in this matter; mohitah--bewildered; tat--that; te--unto you; karma--work; pravaksyami--I shallexplain; yat--which; jnatva--knowing; moksyase--be liberated; asubhat--from ill fortune.
TRANSLATIONEven the intelligent are bewildered in determining what is action and
what is inaction. Now I shall explain to you what action is knowingwhich you shall be liberated from all sins.
PURPORTAction in Krsna consciousness has to be executed in accord with the
examples of previous bona fide devotees. This is recommended in the15th verse. Why such action should not be independent will be explainedin the text to follow.To act in Krsna consciousness, one has to follow the leadership ofauthorized persons who are in a line of disciplic succession asexplained in the beginning of this chapter. The system of Krsnaconsciousness was first narrated to the sun-god, the sun-god explainedit to his son Manu, Manu explained it to his son Iksvaku, and thesystem is current on this earth from that very remote time. Therefore,one has to follow in the footsteps of previous authorities in the lineof disciplic succession. Otherwise even the most intelligent men willbe bewildered regarding the standard actions of Krsna consciousness.For this reason, the Lord decided to instruct Arjuna in Krsnaconsciousness directly. Because of the direct instruction of the Lordto Arjuna, anyone who follows in the footsteps of Arjuna is certainlynot bewildered.It is said that one cannot ascertain the ways of religion simply byimperfect experimental knowledge. Actually the principles of religioncan only be laid down by the Lord Himself. Dharmam tu saksad bhagavat-pranitam (Bhag. 6.3.19). No one can manufacture a religious principleby imperfect speculation. One must follow in the footsteps of greatauthorities like Brahma, Siva, Narada, Manu, the Kumaras, Kapila,Prahlada, Bhisma, Sukadeva Gosvami, Yamaraja, Janaka, Bali Maharaja,etc. By mental speculation one cannot ascertain what is religion orself-realization. Therefore, out of causeless mercy to His devotees,the Lord explains directly to Arjuna what action is and what inactionis. Only action performed in Krsna consciousness can deliver a personfrom the entanglement of material existence.
TEXT 17
karmano hy api boddhavyam
boddhavyam ca vikarmanahakarmanas ca boddhavyamgahana karmano gatih
SYNONYMSkarmanah--working order; hi--certainly; api--also; boddhavyam--should
be understood; boddhavyam--to be understood; ca--also; vikarmanah--forbidden work; akarmanah--inaction; ca--also; boddhavyam--should be
understood; gahana--very difficult; karmanah--working order; gatih--to
enter in to.
TRANSLATIONThe intricacies of action are very hard to understand. Therefore one
should know properly what action is, what forbidden action is, and whatinaction is.
PURPORTIf one is serious about liberation from material bondage, one has to
understand the distinctions between action, inaction and unauthorizedactions. One has to apply oneself to such an analysis of action,reaction and perverted actions because it is a very difficult subjectmatter. To understand Krsna consciousness and action according to themodes, one has to learn one's relationship with the Supreme; i.e., onewho has learned perfectly knows that every living entity is the eternalservitor of the Lord and that consequently one has to act in Krsnaconsciousness. The entire Bhagavad-gita is directed toward thisconclusion. Any other conclusions, against this consciousness and itsattendant reactions, are vikarmas, or prohibited actions. To understandall this one has to associate with authorities in Krsna consciousnessand learn the secret from them; this is as good as learning from theLord directly. Otherwise, even the most intelligent person will bebewildered.
TEXT 18
karmany akarma yah pasyed
akarmani ca karma yahsa buddhiman manusyesusa yuktah krtsna-karma-krt
SYNONYMSkarmani--in action; akarma--inaction; yah--one who; pasyet--observes;
akarmani--in inaction; ca--also; karma--fruitive action; yah--one who;sah--he; buddhi-man--is intelligent; manusyesu--in human society; sah--he; yuktah--in the transcendental position; krtsna-karma-krt--althoughengaged in all activities.
TRANSLATIONOne who sees inaction in action, and action in inaction, is intelligent
among men, and he is in the transcendental position, although engagedin all sorts of activities.
PURPORTA person acting in Krsna consciousness is naturally free from the bonds
of karma. His activities are all performed for Krsna; therefore he doesnot enjoy or suffer any of the effects of work. Consequently he isintelligent in human society, even though he is engaged in all sorts ofactivities for Krsna. Akarma means without reaction to work. Theimpersonalist ceases fruitive activities out of fear, so that theresultant action may not be a stumbling block on the path of self-realization, but the personalist knows rightly his position as the
eternal servitor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore he
engages himself in the activities of Krsna consciousness. Becauseeverything is done for Krsna, he enjoys only transcendental happinessin the discharge of this service. Those who are engaged in this processare known to be without desire for personal sense gratification. Thesense of eternal servitorship to Krsna makes one immune to all sorts ofreactionary elements of work.
TEXT 19
yasya sarve samarambhah
kama-sankalpa-varjitahjnanagni-dagdha-karmanamtam ahuh panditam budhah
SYNONYMSyasya--one whose; sarve--all sorts of; samarambhah--in all attempts;
kama--desire for sense gratification; sankalpa--determination;varjitah--are devoid of; jnana--of perfect knowledge; agni--fire;dagdha--being burnt by; karmanam--the performer; tam--him; ahuh--declare; panditam--learned; budhah--of those who know.
TRANSLATIONOne is understood to be in full knowledge whose every act is devoid of
desire for sense gratification. He is said by sages to be a worker forwhose fruitive action is burned up by the fire of perfect knowledge.
PURPORTOnly a person in full knowledge can understand the activities of a
person in Krsna consciousness. Because the person in Krsnaconsciousness is devoid of all kinds of sense-gratificatorypropensities, it is to be understood that he has burned up thereactions of his work by perfect knowledge of his constitutionalposition as the eternal servitor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.He is actually learned who has attained to such perfection ofknowledge. Development of this knowledge of the eternal servitorship tothe Lord is compared to fire. Such a fire, once kindled, can burn upall kinds of reactions to work.
TEXT 20
tyaktva karma-phalasangam
nitya-trpto nirasrayahkarmany abhipravrtto 'pinaiva kincit karoti sah
SYNONYMStyaktva--having given up; karma-phala-asangam--attachment for fruitive
results; nitya--always; trptah--being satisfied; nirasrayah--withoutany shelter; karmani--in activity; abhipravrttah--being fully engaged;api--in spite of; na--does not; eva--certainly; kincit--anything;karoti--do; sah--he.
TRANSLATION
Abandoning all attachment to the results of his activities, ever
satisfied and independent, he performs no fruitive action, althoughengaged in all kinds of undertakings.
PURPORTThis freedom from the bondage of actions is possible only in Krsna
consciousness when one is doing everything for Krsna. A Krsna consciousperson acts out of pure love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead,and therefore he has no attraction for the results of the action. He isnot even attached to his personal maintenance, for everything is leftto Krsna. Nor is he anxious to secure things, nor to protect thingsalready in his possession. He does his duty to his best ability andleaves everything to Krsna. Such an unattached person is always freefrom the resultant reactions of good and bad; it is as though he werenot doing anything. This is the sign of akarma, or actions withoutfruitive reactions. Any other action, therefore, devoid of Krsnaconsciousness, is binding upon the worker, and that is the real aspectof vikarma, as explained hereinbefore.
TEXT 21
nirasir yata-cittatma
tyakta-sarva-parigrahahsariram kevalam karmakurvan napnoti kilbisam
SYNONYMSnirasih--without desire for the result; yata--controlled; citta-atma--
mind and intelligence; tyakta--giving up; sarva--all; parigrahah--senseof proprietorship over all possessions; sariram--in keeping body andsoul together; kevalam--only; karma--work; kurvan--doing so; na--never;apnoti--does acquire; kilbisam--sinful reactions.
TRANSLATIONSuch a man of understanding acts with mind and intelligence perfectly
controlled, gives up all sense of proprietorship over his possessionsand acts only for the bare necessities of life. Thus working, he is notaffected by sinful reactions.
PURPORTA Krsna conscious person does not expect good or bad results in his
activities. His mind and intelligence are fully controlled. He knowsthat because he is part and parcel of the Supreme and therefore thepart played by him, as a part and parcel of the whole, is not by hischoice but is chosen for him by the Supreme and is done only throughHis agency. When the hand moves, it does not move out of its ownaccord, but by the endeavor of the whole body. A Krsna conscious personis always dovetailed with the supreme desire, for he has no desire forpersonal sense gratification. He moves exactly like a part of amachine. As a machine part requires oiling and cleaning formaintenance, similarly, a Krsna conscious man maintains himself by hiswork just to remain fit for action in the transcendental loving serviceof the Lord. He is therefore immune to all the reactions of his
endeavors. Like an animal, he has no proprietorship even over his own
body. A cruel proprietor of an animal sometimes kills the animal in hispossession, yet the animal does not protest. Nor does it have any realindependence. A Krsna conscious person, fully engaged in self-realization, has very little time to falsely possess any materialobject. For maintaining body and soul, he does not require unfair meansof accumulating money. He does not, therefore, become contaminated bysuch material sins. He is free from all reactions to his actions.
TEXT 22
yadrccha-labha-santusto
dvandvatito vimatsarahsamah siddhav asiddhau cakrtvapi na nibadhyate
SYNONYMSyadrccha--out of its own accord; labha--gain; santustah--satisfied;
dvandva--duality; atitah--surpassed; vimatsarah--free from envy; samah--steady; siddhau--in success; asiddhau--failure; ca--also; krtva--doing; api--although; na--never; nibadhyate--is affected.
TRANSLATIONHe who is satisfied with gain which comes of its own accord, who is
free from duality and does not envy, who is steady both in success andfailure, is never entangled, although performing actions.
PURPORTA Krsna conscious person does not make much endeavor even to maintain
his body. He is satisfied with gains which are obtained of their ownaccord. He neither begs nor borrows, but he labors honestly as far asis in his power, and is satisfied with whatever is obtained by his ownhonest labor. He is therefore independent in his livelihood. He doesnot allow anyone's service to hamper his own service in Krsnaconsciousness. However, for the service of the Lord he can participatein any kind of action without being disturbed by the duality of thematerial world. The duality of the material world is felt in terms ofheat and cold, or misery and happiness. A Krsna conscious person isabove duality because he does not hesitate to act in any way for thesatisfaction of Krsna. Therefore he is steady both in success and infailure. These signs are visible when one is fully in transcendentalknowledge.
TEXT 23
gata-sangasya muktasya
jnanavasthita-cetasahyajnayacaratah karmasamagram praviliyate
SYNONYMSgata-sangasya--unattached to the modes of material nature; muktasya--of
the liberated; jnana-avasthita--situated in transcendence; cetasah--of
such wisdom; yajnaya--for the sake of Yajna (Krsna); acaratah--so
active; karma--work; samagram--in total; praviliyate--merges entirely.
TRANSLATIONThe work of a man who is unattached to the modes of material nature and
who is fully situated in transcendental knowledge merges entirely intotranscendence.
PURPORTBecoming fully Krsna conscious, one is freed from all dualities and
thus is free from the contaminations of the material modes. He canbecome liberated because he knows his constitutional position inrelationship with Krsna; and thus his mind cannot be drawn from Krsnaconsciousness. Consequently, whatever he does, he does for Krsna who isthe primeval Visnu. Therefore, all his works are technically sacrificesbecause sacrifice involves satisfying the Supreme Person, Krsna. Theresultant reactions to all such work certainly merge intotranscendence, and one does not suffer material effects.
TEXT 24
brahmarpanam brahma havir
brahmagnau brahmana hutambrahmaiva tena gantavyambrahma-karma-samadhina
SYNONYMSbrahma--spiritual in nature; arpanam--contribution; brahma--the
Supreme; havih--butter; brahma--spiritual; agnau--in the fire ofconsummation; brahmana--by the spirit soul; hutam--offered; brahma--spiritual kingdom; eva--certainly; tena--by him; gantavyam--to bereached; brahma--spiritual; karma--activities; samadhina--by completeabsorption.
TRANSLATIONA person who is fully absorbed in Krsna consciousness is sure to attain
the spiritual kingdom because of his full contribution to spiritualactivities, in which the consummation is absolute and that which isoffered is of the same spiritual nature.
PURPORTHow activities in Krsna consciousness can lead one ultimately to the
spiritual goal is described here. There are various activities in Krsnaconsciousness, and all of them will be described in the followingverses. But, for the present, just the principle of Krsna consciousnessis described. A conditioned soul, entangled in material contamination,is sure to act in the material atmosphere, and yet he has to get out ofsuch an environment. The process by which the conditioned soul can getout of the material atmosphere is Krsna consciousness. For example, apatient who is suffering from a disorder of the bowels due tooverindulgence in milk products is cured by another milk product,namely curds. The materially absorbed conditioned soul can be cured byKrsna consciousness as set forth here in the Gita. This process is
generally known as yajna, or activities (sacrifices) simply meant for
the satisfaction of Visnu, or Krsna. The more the activities of thematerial world are performed in Krsna consciousness, or for Visnu only,the more the atmosphere becomes spiritualized by complete absorption.Brahman means spiritual. The Lord is spiritual, and the rays of Histranscendental body are called brahmajyoti, His spiritual effulgence.Everything that exists is situated in that brahmajyoti, but when thejyoti is covered by illusion (maya) or sense gratification, it iscalled material. This material veil can be removed at once by Krsnaconsciousness; thus the offering for the sake of Krsna consciousness,the consuming agent of such an offering or contribution, the process ofconsumption, the contributor, and the result are--all combinedtogether--Brahman, or the Absolute Truth. The Absolute Truth covered bymaya is called matter. Matter dovetailed for the cause of the AbsoluteTruth regains its spiritual quality. Krsna consciousness is the processof converting the illusory consciousness into Brahman, or the Supreme.When the mind is fully absorbed in Krsna consciousness, it is said tobe in samadhi, or trance. Anything done in such transcendentalconsciousness is called yajna, or sacrifice for the Absolute. In thatcondition of spiritual consciousness, the contributor, thecontribution, the consumption, the performer or leader of theperformance, and the result or ultimate gain--everything--becomes onein the Absolute, the Supreme Brahman. That is the method of Krsnaconsciousness.
TEXT 25
daivam evapare yajnam
yoginah paryupasatebrahmagnav apare yajnamyajnenaivopajuhvati
SYNONYMSdaivam--in worshiping the demigods; eva--like this; apare--some;
yajnam--sacrifices; yoginah--the mystics; paryupasate--worshipperfectly; brahma--the Absolute Truth; agnau--in the fire of; apare--others; yajnam--sacrifice; yajnena--by sacrifice; eva--thus;upajuhvati--worship.
TRANSLATIONSome yogis perfectly worship the demigods by offering different
sacrifices to them, and some of them offer sacrifices in the fire ofthe Supreme Brahman.
PURPORTAs described above, a person engaged in discharging duties in Krsna
consciousness is also called a perfect yogi or a first-class mystic.But there are others also, who perform similar sacrifices in theworship of demigods, and still others who sacrifice to the SupremeBrahman, or the impersonal feature of the Supreme Lord. So there aredifferent kinds of sacrifices in terms of different categories. Suchdifferent categories of sacrifice by different types of performers onlysuperficially demark varieties of sacrifice. Factual sacrifice means tosatisfy the Supreme Lord, Visnu, who is also known as Yajna. All thedifferent varieties of sacrifice can be placed within two primary
divisions: namely, sacrifice of worldly possessions and sacrifice in
pursuit of transcendental knowledge. Those who are in Krsnaconsciousness sacrifice all material possessions for the satisfactionof the Supreme Lord, while others, who want some temporary materialhappiness, sacrifice their material possessions to satisfy demigodssuch as Indra, the sun-god, etc. And others, who are impersonalists,sacrifice their identity by merging into the existence of impersonalBrahman. The demigods are powerful living entities appointed by theSupreme Lord for the maintenance and supervision of all materialfunctions like the heating, watering and lighting of the universe.Those who are interested in material benefits worship the demigods byvarious sacrifices according to the Vedic rituals. They are calledbahv-isvara-vadi, or believers in many gods. But others, who worshipthe impersonal feature of the Absolute Truth and regard the forms ofthe demigods as temporary, sacrifice their individual selves in thesupreme fire and thus end their individual existences by merging intothe existence of the Supreme. Such impersonalists spend their time inphilosophical speculation to understand the transcendental nature ofthe Supreme. In other words, the fruitive workers sacrifice theirmaterial possessions for material enjoyment, whereas the impersonalistsacrifices his material designations with a view to merging into theexistence of the Supreme. For the impersonalist, the fire altar ofsacrifice is the Supreme Brahman, and the offering is the self beingconsumed by the fire of Brahman. The Krsna conscious person, likeArjuna, however, sacrifices everything for the satisfaction of Krsna,and thus all his material possessions as well as his own self--everything--is sacrificed for Krsna. Thus, he is the first-class yogi;but he does not lose his individual existence.
TEXT 26
srotradinindriyany anye
samyamagnisu juhvatisabdadin visayan anyaindriyagnisu juhvati
SYNONYMSsrotra-adini--hearing process; indriyani--senses; anye--others;
samyama--of restraint; agnisu--in the fire; juhvati--offers; sabda-adin--sound vibration, etc.; visayan--objects of sense gratification;anye--others; indriya--of sense organs; agnisu--in the fire; juhvati--sacrifice.
TRANSLATIONSome sacrifice the hearing process and the senses in the fire of the
controlled mind, and others sacrifice the objects of the senses, suchas sound, in the fire of the sacrifice.
PURPORTThe four divisions of human life, namely the brahmacari, the grhastha,
the vanaprastha, and the sannyasi, are all meant to become perfectyogis or transcendentalists. Since human life is not meant for ourenjoying sense gratification like the animals, the four orders of humanlife are so arranged that one may become perfect in spiritual life. Thebrahmacaris, or students under the care of a bona fide spiritual
master, control the mind by abstaining from sense gratification. They
are referred to in this verse as sacrificing the hearing process andthe senses in the fire of the controlled mind. A brahmacari hears onlywords concerning Krsna consciousness; hearing is the basic principlefor understanding, and therefore the pure brahmacari engages fully inharer namanukirtanam--chanting and hearing the glories of the Lord. Herestrains himself from the vibrations of material sounds, and hishearing is engaged in the transcendental sound vibration of Hare Krsna,Hare Krsna. Similarly, the householders, who have some license forsense gratification, perform such acts with great restraint. Sex life,intoxication and meat eating are general tendencies of human society,but a regulated householder does not indulge in unrestricted sex lifeand other sense gratification. Marriage on principles of religious lifeis therefore current in all civilized human society because that is theway for restricted sex life. This restricted, unattached sex life isalso a kind of yajna because the restricted householder sacrifices hisgeneral tendency toward sense gratification for higher transcendentallife.
TEXT 27
sarvanindriya-karmani
prana-karmani capareatma-samyama-yogagnaujuhvati jnana-dipite
SYNONYMSsarvani--all; indriya--senses; karmani--functions; prana-karmani--
functions of the life breath; ca--also; apare--others; atma-samyama--controlling the mind; yoga--linking process; agnau--in the fire of;juhvati--offers; jnana-dipite--because of the urge for self-realization.
TRANSLATIONThose who are interested in self-realization, in terms of mind and
sense control, offer the functions of all the senses, as well as thevital force [breath], as oblations into the fire of the controlledmind.
PURPORTThe yoga system conceived by Patanjali is referred to herein. In the
Yoga-sutra of Patanjali, the soul is called pratyag-atma and parag-atma. As long as the soul is attached to sense enjoyment, it is calledparag-atma. The soul is subjected to the functions of ten kinds of airat work within the body, and this is perceived through the breathingsystem. The Patanjali system of yoga instructs one on how to controlthe functions of the body's air in a technical manner so thatultimately all the functions of the air within become favorable forpurifying the soul of material attachment. According to this yogasystem, pratyag-atma is the ultimate goal. This pratyag-atma is awithdrawal from activities in matter. The senses interact with thesense objects, like the ear for hearing, eyes for seeing, nose forsmelling, tongue for tasting, hand for touching, and all of them arethus engaged in activities outside the self. They are called thefunctions of the prana-vayu. The apana-vayu goes downwards, vyana-vayu
acts to shrink and expand, samana-vayu adjusts equilibrium, udana-vayu
goes upwards--and when one is enlightened, one engages all these insearching for self-realization.
TEXT 28
dravya-yajnas tapo-yajna
yoga-yajnas tathaparesvadhyaya-jnana-yajnas cayatayah samsita-vratah
SYNONYMSdravya-yajnah--sacrificing one's possessions; tapah-yajnah--sacrifice
in austerities; yoga-yajnah--sacrifice in eightfold mysticism; tatha--thus; apare--others; svadhyaya--sacrifice in the study of the Vedas;jnana-yajnah--sacrifice in advancement of transcendental knowledge; ca--also; yatayah--enlightened; samsita--taken to strict; vratah--vows.
TRANSLATIONThere are others who, enlightened by sacrificing their material
possessions in severe austerities, take strict vows and practice theyoga of eightfold mysticism, and others study the Vedas for theadvancement of transcendental knowledge.
PURPORTThese sacrifices may be fitted into various divisions. There are
persons who are sacrificing their possessions in the form of variouskinds of charities. In India, the rich mercantile community or princelyorders open various kinds of charitable institutions like dharma-sala,anna-ksetra, atithi-sala, anathalaya, vidya-pitha, etc. In othercountries, too, there are many hospitals, old age homes and similarcharitable foundations meant for distributing food, education andmedical treatment free to the poor. All these charitable activities arecalled dravyamaya-yajna. There are others who, for higher elevation inlife or for promotion to higher planets within the universe,voluntarily accept many kinds of austerities such as candrayana andcaturmasya. These processes entail severe vows for conducting lifeunder certain rigid rules. For example, under the caturmasya vow thecandidate does not shave for four months during the year (July toOctober), he does not eat certain foods, does not eat twice in a dayand does not leave home. Such sacrifice of the comforts of life iscalled tapomaya-yajna. There are still others who engage themselves indifferent kinds of mystic yogas like the Patanjali system (for merginginto the existence of the Absolute), or hatha-yoga or astanga-yoga (forparticular perfections). And some travel to all the sanctified placesof pilgrimage. All these practices are called yoga-yajna, sacrifice fora certain type of perfection in the material world. There are otherswho engage themselves in the studies of different Vedic literatures,specifically the Upanisads and Vedanta-sutras, or the Sankhyaphilosophy. All of these are called svadhyaya-yajna. or engagement inthe sacrifice of studies. All these yogis are faithfully engaged indifferent types of sacrifice and are seeking a higher status of life.Krsna consciousness, is, however, different from these because it isthe direct service of the Supreme Lord. Krsna consciousness cannot beattained by any one of the above-mentioned types of sacrifices but can
be attained only by the mercy of the Lord and His bona fide devotee.
Therefore, Krsna consciousness is transcendental.
TEXT 29
apane juhvati pranam
prane 'panam tathaparepranapana-gati ruddhvapranayama-parayanahapare niyataharahpranan pranesu juhvati
SYNONYMSapane--air which acts downward; juhvati--offers; pranam--air which acts
outward; prane--in the air going outward; apanam--air going downward;tatha--as also; apare--others; prana--air going outward; apana--airgoing downward; gati--movement; ruddhva--checking; prana-ayama--tranceinduced by stopping all breathing; parayanah--so inclined; apare--others; niyata--controlled; aharah--eating; pranan--outgoing air;pranesu--in the outgoing air; juhvati--sacrifices.
TRANSLATIONAnd there are even others who are inclined to the process of breath
restraint to remain in trance, and they practice stopping the movementof the outgoing breath into the incoming, and incoming breath into theoutgoing, and thus at last remain in trance, stopping all breathing.Some of them, curtailing the eating process, offer the outgoing breathinto itself, as a sacrifice.
PURPORTThis system of yoga for controlling the breathing process is called
pranayama, and in the beginning it is practiced in the hatha-yogasystem through different sitting postures. All of these processes arerecommended for controlling the senses and for advancement in spiritualrealization. This practice involves controlling the air within the bodyto enable simultaneous passage in opposite directions. The apana airgoes downward, and the prana air goes up. The pranayama-yogi practicesbreathing the opposite way until the currents are neutralized intopuraka, equilibrium. Similarly, when the exhaled breathing is offeredto the inhaled breathing, it is called recaka. When both air currentsare completely stopped, it is called kumbhaka-yoga. By practice ofkumbhaka-yoga, the yogis increase the duration of life by many, manyyears. A Krsna conscious person, however, being always situated in thetranscendental loving service of the Lord, automatically becomes thecontroller of the senses. His senses, being always engaged in theservice of Krsna, have no chance of becoming otherwise engaged. So atthe end of life, he is naturally transferred to the transcendentalplane of Lord Krsna; consequently he makes no attempt to increase hislongevity. He is at once raised to the platform of liberation. A Krsnaconscious person begins from the transcendental stage, and he isconstantly in that consciousness. Therefore, there is no falling down,and ultimately he enters into the abode of the Lord without delay. Thepractice of reduced eating is automatically done when one eats onlykrsna-prasadam, or food which is offered first to the Lord. Reducingthe eating process is very helpful in the matter of sense control. And
without sense control there is no possibility of getting out of
material entanglement.
TEXT 30
sarve 'py ete yajna-vido
yajna-ksapita-kalmasahyajna-sistamrta-bhujoyanti brahma sanatanam
SYNONYMSsarve--all; api--although apparently different; ete--all these; yajna-
vidah--conversant with the purpose of performing; yajna--sacrifices;ksapita--being cleansed as the result of such performances; kalmasah--sinful reactions; yajna-sista--as a result of such performances ofyajna; amrta-bhujah--those who have tasted such nectar; yanti--doapproach; brahma--the supreme; sanatanam--eternal atmosphere.
TRANSLATIONAll these performers who know the meaning of sacrifice become cleansed
of sinful reaction, and, having tasted the nectar of the results ofsuch sacrifice, they go to the supreme eternal atmosphere.
PURPORTFrom the foregoing explanation of different types of sacrifice (namely
sacrifice of one's possessions, study of the Vedas or philosophicaldoctrines, and performance of the yoga system), it is found that thecommon aim of all is to control the senses. Sense gratification is theroot cause of material existence; therefore, unless and until one issituated on a platform apart from sense gratification, there is nochance of being elevated to the eternal platform of full knowledge,full bliss and full life. This platform is in the eternal atmosphere,or Brahman atmosphere. All the above-mentioned sacrifices help one tobecome cleansed of the sinful reactions of material existence. By thisadvancement in life, one not only becomes happy and opulent in thislife, but also, at the end, he enters into the eternal kingdom of God,either merging into the impersonal Brahman or associating with theSupreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna.
TEXT 31
nayam loko 'sty ayajnasya
kuto 'nyah kuru-sattama
SYNONYMSna--never; ayam--this; lokah--planet; asti--there is; ayajnasya--of the
foolish; kutah--where is; anyah--the other; kuru-sat-tama--O bestamongst the Kurus.
TRANSLATIONO best of the Kuru dynasty, without sacrifice one can never live
happily on this planet or in this life: what then of the next?
PURPORT
Whatever form of material existence one is in, one is invariably
ignorant of his real situation. In other words, existence in thematerial world is due to the multiple reactions to our sinful lives.Ignorance is the cause of sinful life, and sinful life is the cause ofone's dragging on in material existence. The human form of life is theonly loophole by which one may get out of this entanglement. The Vedas,therefore, give us a chance for escape by pointing out the paths ofreligion, economic comfort, regulated sense gratification and, at last,the means to get out of the miserable condition entirely. The path ofreligion, or the different kinds of sacrifice recommended above,automatically solves our economic problems. By performance of yajna wecan have enough food, enough milk, etc.--even if there is a so-calledincrease of population. When the body is fully supplied, naturally thenext stage is to satisfy the senses. The Vedas prescribe, therefore,sacred marriage for regulated sense gratification. Thereby one isgradually elevated to the platform of release from material bondage,and the highest perfection of liberation is to associate with theSupreme Lord. Perfection is achieved by performance of yajna(sacrifice), as described above. Now, if a person is not inclined toperform yajna according to the Vedas, how can he expect a happy life?There are different grades of material comforts in different heavenlyplanets, and in all cases there is immense happiness for personsengaged in different kinds of yajna. But the highest kind of happinessthat a man can achieve is to be promoted to the spiritual planets bypractice of Krsna consciousness. A life of Krsna consciousness istherefore the solution to all the problems of material existence.
TEXT 32
evam bahu-vidha yajna
vitata brahmano mukhekarma-jan viddhi tan sarvanevam jnatva vimoksyase
SYNONYMSevam--thus; bahu-vidhah--various kinds of; yajnah--sacrifices; vitatah-
-widespread; brahmanah--of the Vedas; mukhe--in the face of; karma-jan--born of work; viddhi--you should know; tan--then; sarvan--all; evam--thus; jnatva--knowing; vimoksyase--be liberated.
TRANSLATIONAll these different types of sacrifice are approved by the Vedas, and
all of them are born of different types of work. Knowing them as such,you will become liberated.
PURPORTDifferent types of sacrifice, as discussed above, are mentioned in the
Vedas to suit the different types of worker. Because men are so deeplyabsorbed in the bodily concept, these sacrifices are so arranged thatone can work either with the body, the mind, or the intelligence. Butall of them are recommended for ultimately bringing about liberationfrom the body. This is confirmed by the Lord herewith from His ownmouth.
TEXT 33
sreyan dravya-mayad yajnaj
jnana-yajnah parantapasarvam karmakhilam parthajnane parisamapyate
SYNONYMSsreyan--greater; dravya-mayat--than the sacrifice of material
possessions; yajnat--knowledge; jnana-yajnah--sacrifice in knowledge;parantapa--O chastiser of the enemy; sarvam--all; karma--activities;akhilam--in totality; partha--O son of Prtha; jnane--in knowledge;parisamapyate--ends in.
TRANSLATIONO chastiser of the enemy, the sacrifice of knowledge is greater than
the sacrifice of material possessions. O son of Prtha, after all, thesacrifice of work culminates in transcendental knowledge.
PURPORTThe purpose of all sacrifices is to arrive at the status of complete
knowledge, then to gain release from material miseries, and,ultimately, to engage in loving transcendental service to the SupremeLord (Krsna consciousness). Nonetheless, there is a mystery about allthese different activities of sacrifice, and one should know thismystery. Sacrifices sometimes take different forms according to theparticular faith of the performer. When one's faith reaches the stageof transcendental knowledge, the performer of sacrifices should beconsidered more advanced than those who simply sacrifice materialpossessions without such knowledge, for without attainment ofknowledge, sacrifices remain on the material platform and bestow nospiritual benefit. Real knowledge culminates in Krsna consciousness,the highest stage of transcendental knowledge. Without the elevation ofknowledge, sacrifices are simply material activities. When, however,they are elevated to the level of transcendental knowledge, all suchactivities enter onto the spiritual platform. Depending on differencesin consciousness, sacrificial activities are sometimes called karma-kanda, fruitive activities, and sometimes jnana-kanda, knowledge in thepursuit of truth. It is better when the end is knowledge.
TEXT 34
tad viddhi pranipatena
pariprasnena sevayaupadeksyanti te jnanamjnaninas tattva-darsinah
SYNONYMStat--that knowledge of different sacrifices; viddhi--try to understand;
pranipatena--by approaching a spiritual master; pariprasnena--bysubmissive inquiries; sevaya--by the rendering of service;upadeksyanti--initiate; te--unto you; jnanam--knowledge; jnaninah--theself-realized; tattva--truth; darsinah--the seers.
TRANSLATION
Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire
from him submissively and render service unto him. The self-realizedsoul can impart knowledge unto you because he has seen the truth.
PURPORTThe path of spiritual realization is undoubtedly difficult. The Lord
therefore advises us to approach a bona fide spiritual master in theline of disciplic succession from the Lord Himself. No one can be abona fide spiritual master without following this principle ofdisciplic succession. The Lord is the original spiritual master, and aperson in the disciplic succession can convey the message of the Lordas it is to his disciple. No one can be spiritually realized bymanufacturing his own process, as is the fashion of the foolishpretenders. The Bhagavatam (6.3.19) says, dharmam tu saksad bhagavat-pranitam--the path of religion is directly enunciated by the Lord.Therefore, mental speculation or dry arguments cannot help one progressin spiritual life. One has to approach a bona fide spiritual master toreceive the knowledge. Such a spiritual master should be accepted infull surrender, and one should serve the spiritual master like a menialservant, without false prestige. Satisfaction of the self-realizedspiritual master is the secret of advancement in spiritual life.Inquiries and submission constitute the proper combination forspiritual understanding. Unless there is submission and service,inquiries from the learned spiritual master will not be effective. Onemust be able to pass the test of the spiritual master, and when he seesthe genuine desire of the disciple, he automatically blesses thedisciple with genuine spiritual understanding. In this verse, bothblind following and absurd inquiries are condemned. One should not onlyhear submissively from the spiritual master, but one must also get aclear understanding from him, in submission and service and inquiries.A bona fide spiritual master is by nature very kind toward thedisciple. Therefore when the student is submissive and is always readyto render service, the reciprocation of knowledge and inquiries becomesperfect.
TEXT 35
yaj jnatva na punar moham
evam yasyasi pandavayena bhutany asesanidraksyasy atmany atho mayi
SYNONYMSyat--which; jnatva--knowing; na--never; punah--again; moham--illusion;
evam--like this; yasyasi--you shall go; pandava--O son of Pandu; yena--by which; bhutani--all living entities; asesani--totally; draksyasi--you will see; atmani--in the Supreme Soul; atho--or in other words;mayi--in Me.
TRANSLATIONAnd when you have thus learned the truth, you will know that all living
beings are but part of Me--and that they are in Me, and are Mine.
PURPORT
The result of receiving knowledge from a self-realized soul, or one who
knows things as they are, is learning that all living beings are partsand parcels of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Sri Krsna. Thesense of a separated existence from Krsna is called maya (ma--not, ya--this). Some think that we have nothing to do with Krsna, that Krsna isonly a great historical personality and that the Absolute is theimpersonal Brahman. Factually, as it is stated in the Bhagavad-gita,this impersonal Brahman is the personal effulgence of Krsna. Krsna, asthe Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the cause of everything. In theBrahma-samhita it is clearly stated that Krsna is the SupremePersonality of Godhead, the cause of all causes. Even the millions ofincarnations are only His different expansions. Similarly, the livingentities are also expansions of Krsna. The Mayavadi philosopherswrongly think that Krsna loses His own separate existence in His manyexpansions. This thought is material in nature. We have experience inthe material world that a thing, when fragmentally distributed, losesits own original identity. But the Mayavadi philosophers fail tounderstand that absolute means that one plus one is equal to one, andthat one minus one is also equal to one. This is the case in theabsolute world.For want of sufficient knowledge in the absolute science, we are nowcovered with illusion, and therefore we think that we are separate fromKrsna. Although we are separated parts of Krsna, we are neverthelessnot different from Him. The bodily difference of the living entities ismaya, or not actual fact. We are all meant to satisfy Krsna. By mayaalone Arjuna thought that the temporary bodily relationship with hiskinsmen was more important than his eternal spiritual relationship withKrsna. The whole teaching of the Gita is targeted toward this end: thata living being, as His eternal servitor, cannot be separated fromKrsna, and his sense of being an identity apart from Krsna is calledmaya. The living entities, as separate parts and parcels of theSupreme, have a purpose to fulfill. Having forgotten that purpose,since time immemorial, they are situated in different bodies, as men,animals, demigods, etc. Such bodily differences arise fromforgetfulness of the transcendental service of the Lord. But when oneis engaged in transcendental service through Krsna consciousness, onebecomes at once liberated from this illusion. One can acquire such pureknowledge only from the bona fide spiritual master and thereby avoidthe delusion that the living entity is equal to Krsna. Perfectknowledge is that the Supreme Soul, Krsna, is the supreme shelter forall living entities, and giving up such shelter, the living entitiesare deluded by the material energy, imagining themselves to have aseparate identity. Thus, under different standards of materialidentity, they become forgetful of Krsna. When, however, such deludedliving entities become situated in Krsna consciousness, it is to beunderstood that they are on the path of liberation, as confirmed in theBhagavatam (2.10.6): muktir hitvanyatha-rupam svarupena vyavasthitih.Liberation means to be situated in one's constitutional position as theeternal servitor of Krsna (Krsna consciousness).
TEXT 36
api ced asi papebhyah
sarvebhyah papa-krt-tamahsarvam jnana-plavenaiva
vrjinam santarisyasi
SYNONYMSapi--even; cet--if; asi--you are; papebhyah--of sinners; sarvebhyah--of
all; papa-krt-tamah--the greatest sinner; sarvam--all such sinfulactions; jnana-plavena--by the boat of transcendental knowledge; eva--certainly; vrjinam--the ocean of miseries; santarisyasi--you will crosscompletely.
TRANSLATIONEven if you are considered to be the most sinful of all sinners, when
you are situated in the boat of transcendental knowledge, you will beable to cross over the ocean of miseries.
PURPORTProper understanding of one's constitutional position in relationship
to Krsna is so nice that it can at once lift one from the struggle forexistence which goes on in the ocean of nescience. This material worldis sometimes regarded as an ocean of nescience and sometimes as ablazing forest. In the ocean, however expert a swimmer one may be, thestruggle for existence is very severe. If someone comes forward andlifts the struggling swimmer from the ocean, he is the greatest savior.Perfect knowledge, received from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, isthe path of liberation. The boat of Krsna consciousness is very simple,but at the same time the most sublime.
TEXT 37
yathaidhamsi samiddho 'gnir
bhasma-sat kurute 'rjunajnanagnih sarva-karmanibhasma-sat kurute tatha
SYNONYMSyatha--just as; edhamsi--firewood; samiddhah--blazing; agnih--fire;
bhasma-sat--turns into ashes; kurute--so does; arjuna--O Arjuna; jnana-agnih--the fire of knowledge; sarva-karmani--all reactions to materialactivities; bhasma-sat--to ashes; kurute--it so does; tatha--similarly.
TRANSLATIONAs a blazing fire turns firewood to ashes, O Arjuna, so does the fire
of knowledge burn to ashes all reactions to material activities.
PURPORTPerfect knowledge of self and Superself and of their relationship is
compared herein to fire. This fire not only burns up all reactions toimpious activities, but also all reactions to pious activities, turningthem to ashes. There are many stages of reaction: reaction in themaking, reaction fructifying, reaction already achieved, and reaction apriori. But knowledge of the constitutional position of the livingentity burns everything to ashes. When one is in complete knowledge,all reactions, both a priori and a posteriori, are consumed. In the
Vedas (Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 4.4.22) it is stated, ubhe uhaivaisa ete
taraty amrtah sadhv-asadhuni: "One overcomes both the pious and impiousreactions of work."
TEXT 38
na hi jnanena sadrsam
pavitram iha vidyatetat svayam yoga-samsiddhahkalenatmani vindati
SYNONYMSna--never; hi--certainly; jnanena--with knowledge; sadrsam--in
comparison; pavitram--sanctified; iha--in this world; vidyate--exists;tat--that; svayam--himself; yoga--in devotion; samsiddhah--matured;kalena--in course of time; atmani--in himself; vindati--enjoys.
TRANSLATIONIn this world, there is nothing so sublime and pure as transcendental
knowledge. Such knowledge is the mature fruit of all mysticism. And onewho has achieved this enjoys the self with himself in due course oftime.
PURPORTWhen we speak of transcendental knowledge, we do so in terms of
spiritual understanding. As such, there is nothing so sublime and pureas transcendental knowledge. Ignorance is the cause of our bondage, andknowledge is the cause of our liberation. This knowledge is the maturefruit of devotional service, and when one is situated in transcendentalknowledge, he need not search for peace elsewhere, for he enjoys peacewithin himself. In other words, this knowledge and peace culminate inKrsna consciousness. That is the last word in the Bhagavad-gita.
TEXT 39
sraddhaval labhate jnanam
tat-parah samyatendriyahjnanam labdhva param santimacirenadhigacchati
SYNONYMSsraddha-van--a faithful man; labhate--achieves; jnanam--knowledge; tat-
parah--very much attached to it; samyata--controlled; indriyah--senses;jnanam--knowledge; labdhva--having achieved; param--transcendental;santim--peace; acirena--very soon; adhigacchati--attains.
TRANSLATIONA faithful man who is absorbed in transcendental knowledge and who
subdues his senses quickly attains the supreme spiritual peace.
PURPORT
Such knowledge in Krsna consciousness can be achieved by a faithful
person who believes firmly in Krsna. One is called a faithful man whothinks that, simply by acting in Krsna consciousness, he can attain thehighest perfection. This faith is attained by the discharge ofdevotional service, and by chanting Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, KrsnaKrsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, whichcleanses one's heart of all material dirt. Over and above this, oneshould control the senses. A person who is faithful to Krsna and whocontrols the senses can easily attain perfection in the knowledge ofKrsna consciousness without delay.
TEXT 40
ajnas casraddadhanas ca
samsayatma vinasyatinayam loko 'sti na parona sukham samsayatmanah
SYNONYMSajnah--fools who have no knowledge in standard scriptures; ca--and;
asraddadhanah--without faith in revealed scriptures; ca--also; samsaya--doubts; atma--a person; vinasyati--falls back; na--never; ayam--this;lokah--world; asti--there is; na--neither; parah--next life; na--not;sukham--happiness; samsaya--doubtful; atmanah--of the person.
TRANSLATIONBut ignorant and faithless persons who doubt the revealed scriptures do
not attain God consciousness. For the doubting soul there is happinessneither in this world nor in the next.
PURPORTOut of many standard and authoritative revealed scriptures, the
Bhagavad-gita is the best. Persons who are almost like animals have nofaith in, or knowledge of the standard revealed scriptures; and some,even though they have knowledge of, or can cite passages from, therevealed scriptures, have actually no faith in these words. And eventhough others may have faith in scriptures like Bhagavad-gita, they donot believe in or worship the Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna. Suchpersons cannot have any standing in Krsna consciousness. They falldown. Out of all the above-mentioned persons, those who have no faithand are always doubtful make no progress at all. Men without faith inGod and His revealed word find no good in this world, nor in the next.For them there is no happiness whatsoever. One should therefore followthe principles of revealed scriptures with faith and thereby be raisedto the platform of knowledge. Only this knowledge will help one becomepromoted to the transcendental platform of spiritual understanding. Inother words, doubtful persons have no status whatsoever in spiritualemancipation. One should therefore follow in the footsteps of greatacaryas who are in the disciplic succession and thereby attain success.
TEXT 41
yoga-sannyasta-karmanam
jnana-sanchinna-samsayamatmavantam na karmani
nibadhnanti dhananjaya
SYNONYMSyoga--devotional service in karma-yoga; sannyasta--renounced; karmanam-
-of the performers; jnana--knowledge; sanchinna--cut by the advancementof knowledge; samsayam--doubts; atma-vantam--situated in the self; na--never; karmani--work; nibadhnanti--do bind up; dhananjaya--O conquerorof riches.
TRANSLATIONTherefore, one who has renounced the fruits of his action, whose doubts
are destroyed by transcendental knowledge, and who is situated firmlyin the self, is not bound by works, O conqueror of riches.
PURPORTOne who follows the instruction of the Gita, as it is imparted by the
Lord, the Personality of Godhead Himself, becomes free from all doubtsby the grace of transcendental knowledge. He, as a part and parcel ofthe Lord, in full Krsna consciousness, is already established in self-knowledge. As such, he is undoubtedly above bondage to action.
TEXT 42
tasmad ajnana-sambhutam
hrt-stham jnanasinatmanahchittvainam samsayam yogamatisthottistha bharata
SYNONYMStasmat--therefore; ajnana-sambhutam--outcome of ignorance; hrt-stham--
situated in the heart; jnana--knowledge; asina--by the weapon of;atmanah--of the self; chittva--cutting off; enam--this; samsayam--doubt; yogam--in yoga; atistha--be situated; uttistha--stand up tofight; bharata--O descendant of Bharata.
TRANSLATIONTherefore the doubts which have arisen in your heart out of ignorance
should be slashed by the weapon of knowledge. Armed with yoga, OBharata, stand and fight.
PURPORTThe yoga system instructed in this chapter is called sanatana-yoga, or
eternal activities performed by the living entity. This yoga has twodivisions of sacrificial actions: one is called sacrifice of one'smaterial possessions, and the other is called knowledge of self, whichis pure spiritual activity. If sacrifice of one's material possessionsis not dovetailed for spiritual realization, then such sacrificebecomes material. But one who performs such sacrifices with a spiritualobjective, or in devotional service, makes a perfect sacrifice. When wecome to spiritual activities, we find that these are also divided intotwo: namely, understanding of one's own self (or one's constitutionalposition), and the truth regarding the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
One who follows the path of the Gita as it is can very easily
understand these two important divisions of spiritual knowledge. Forhim there is no difficulty in obtaining perfect knowledge of the selfas part and parcel of the Lord. And such understanding is beneficialfor such a person who easily understands the transcendental activitiesof the Lord. In the beginning of this chapter, the transcendentalactivities of the Lord were discussed by the Supreme Lord Himself. Onewho does not understand the instructions of the Gita is faithless, andis to be considered to be misusing the fragmental independence awardedto him by the Lord. In spite of such instructions, one who does notunderstand the real nature of the Lord as the eternal, blissful, all-knowing Personality of Godhead, is certainly fool number one. Ignorancecan be removed by gradual acceptance of the principles of Krsnaconsciousness. Krsna consciousness is awakened by different types ofsacrifices to the demigods, sacrifice to Brahman, sacrifice incelibacy, in household life, in controlling the senses, in practicingmystic yoga, in penance, in forgoing material possessions, in studyingthe Vedas, and in partaking of the social institution calledvarnasrama-dharma. All of these are known as sacrifice, and all of themare based on regulated action. But within all these activities, theimportant factor is self-realization. One who seeks that objective isthe real student of Bhagavad-gita, but one who doubts the authority ofKrsna falls back. One is therefore advised to study Bhagavad-gita, orany other scripture, under a bona fide spiritual master, with serviceand surrender. A bona fide spiritual master is in the disciplicsuccession from time eternal, and he does not deviate at all from theinstructions of the Supreme Lord as they were imparted millions ofyears ago to the sun-god, from whom the instructions of Bhagavad-gitahave come down to the earthly kingdom. One should, therefore, followthe path of Bhagavad-gita as it is expressed in the Gita itself andbeware of self-interested people after personal aggrandizement whodeviate others from the actual path. The Lord is definitely the supremeperson, and His activities are transcendental. One who understands thisis a liberated person from the very beginning of his study of the Gita.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Fourth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Transcendental Knowledge.
Chapter 5
Karma-yoga--Action in Krsna Consciousness
TEXT 1
arjuna uvaca
sannyasam karmanam krsnapunar yogam ca samsasiyac chreya etayor ekamtan me bruhi su-niscitam
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; sannyasam--renunciation; karmanam--of all
activities; krsna--O Krsna; punah--again; yogam--devotional service;ca--also; samsasi--You are praising; yat--which; sreyah--is beneficial;etayoh--of these two; ekam--one; tat--that; me--unto me; bruhi--pleasetell; su-niscitam--definitely.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: O Krsna, first of all You ask me to renounce work, and
then again You recommend work with devotion. Now will You kindly tellme definitely which of the two is more beneficial?
PURPORTIn this Fifth Chapter of the Bhagavad-gita, the Lord says that work in
devotional service is better than dry mental speculation. Devotionalservice is easier than the latter because, being transcendental innature, it frees one from reaction. In the Second Chapter, preliminaryknowledge of the soul and its entanglement in the material body wereexplained. How to get out of this material encagement by buddhi-yoga,or devotional service, was also explained therein. In the ThirdChapter, it was explained that a person who is situated on the platformof knowledge no longer has any duties to perform. And, in the FourthChapter, the Lord told Arjuna that all kinds of sacrificial workculminate in knowledge. However, at the end of the Fourth Chapter, theLord advised Arjuna to wake up and fight, being situated in perfectknowledge. Therefore, by simultaneously stressing the importance ofboth work in devotion and inaction in knowledge, Krsna has perplexedArjuna and confused his determination. Arjuna understands thatrenunciation in knowledge involves cessation of all kinds of workperformed as sense activities. But if one performs work in devotionalservice, then how is work stopped? In other words, he thinks thatsannyasa, or renunciation in knowledge, should be altogether free fromall kinds of activity because work and renunciation appear to him to beincompatible. He appears not to have understood that work in fullknowledge is nonreactive and is therefore the same as inaction. Heinquires, therefore, whether he should cease work altogether, or workwith full knowledge.
TEXT 2
sri-bhagavan uvaca
sannyasah karma-yogas canihsreyasa-karav ubhautayos tu karma-sannyasatkarma-yogo visisyate
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Personality of Godhead said; sannyasah--
renunciation of work; karma-yogah--work in devotion; ca--also;nihsreyasa-karau--all leading to the path of liberation; ubhau--both;tayoh--of the two; tu--but; karma-sannyasat--in comparison to therenunciation of fruitive work; karma-yogah--work in devotion;visisyate--is better.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: The renunciation of work and work in devotion
are both good for liberation. But, of the two, work in devotionalservice is better than renunciation of works.
PURPORT
Fruitive activities (seeking sense gratification) are cause for
material bondage. As long as one is engaged in activities aimed atimproving the standard of bodily comfort, one is sure to transmigrateto different types of bodies, thereby continuing material bondageperpetually. Srimad-Bhagavatam (5.5.4-6) confirms this as follows:
nunam pramattah kurute vikarma
yad indriya-pritaya aprnotina sadhu manye yata atmano 'yamasann api klesa-da asa dehah
parabhavas tavad abodha-jato
yavan na jijnasata atma-tattvamyavat kriyas tavad idam mano vaikarmatmakam yena sarira-bandhah
evam manah karma-vasam prayunkte
avidyayatmany upadhiyamanepritir na yavan mayi vasudevena mucyate deha-yogena tavat
"People are mad after sense gratification, and they do not know that
this present body, which is full of miseries, is a result of one'sfruitive activities in the past. Although this body is temporary, it isalways giving one trouble in many ways. Therefore, to act for sensegratification is not good. One is considered to be a failure in life aslong as he makes no inquiry about his real identity. As long as he doesnot know his real identity, he has to work for fruitive results forsense gratification, and as long as one is engrossed in theconsciousness of sense gratification one has to transmigrate from onebody to another. Although the mind may be engrossed in fruitiveactivities and influenced by ignorance, one must develop a love fordevotional service to Vasudeva. Only then can one have the opportunityto get out of the bondage of material existence."Therefore, jnana (or knowledge that one is not this material body butspirit soul) is not sufficient for liberation. One has to act in thestatus of spirit soul, otherwise there is no escape from materialbondage. Action in Krsna consciousness is not, however, action on thefruitive platform. Activities performed in full knowledge strengthenone's advancement in real knowledge. Without Krsna consciousness, mererenunciation of fruitive activities does not actually purify the heartof a conditioned soul. As long as the heart is not purified, one has towork on the fruitive platform. But action in Krsna consciousnessautomatically helps one escape the result of fruitive action so thatone need not descend to the material platform. Therefore, action inKrsna consciousness is always superior to renunciation, which alwaysentails a risk of falling. Renunciation without Krsna consciousness isincomplete, as is confirmed by Srila Rupa Gosvami in his Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.2.258):
prapancikataya buddhya
hari-sambandhi-vastunahmumuksubhih parityagovairagyam phalgu kathyate
"Renunciation by persons eager to achieve liberation of things which
are related to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, though they arematerial, is called incomplete renunciation." Renunciation is complete
when it is in the knowledge that everything in existence belongs to the
Lord and that no one should claim proprietorship over anything. Oneshould understand that, factually, nothing belongs to anyone. Thenwhere is the question of renunciation? One who knows that everything isKrsna's property is always situated in renunciation. Since everythingbelongs to Krsna, everything should be employed in the service ofKrsna. This perfect form of action in Krsna consciousness is far betterthan any amount of artificial renunciation by a sannyasi of theMayavadi school.
TEXT 3
jneyah sa nitya-sannyasi
yo na dvesti na kanksatinirdvandvo hi maha-bahosukham bandhat pramucyate
SYNONYMSjneyah--should be known; sah--he; nitya--always; sannyasi--renouncer;
yah--who; na--never; dvesti--abhors; na--nor; kanksati--desires;nirdvandvah--free from all dualities; hi--certainly; maha-baho--Omighty-armed one; sukham--happily; bandhat--from bondage; pramucyate--is completely liberated.
TRANSLATIONOne who neither hates nor desires the fruits of his activities is known
to be always renounced. Such a person, free from all dualities, easilyovercomes material bondage and is completely liberated, O mighty-armedArjuna.
PURPORTOne who is fully in Krsna consciousness is always a renouncer because
he feels neither hatred nor desire for the results of his actions. Sucha renouncer, dedicated to the transcendental loving service of theLord, is fully qualified in knowledge because he knows hisconstitutional position in his relationship with Krsna. He knows fullywell that Krsna is the whole and that he is part and parcel of Krsna.Such knowledge is perfect because it is qualitatively andquantitatively correct. The concept of oneness with Krsna is incorrectbecause the part cannot be equal to the whole. Knowledge that one isone in quality yet different in quantity is correct transcendentalknowledge leading one to become full in himself, having nothing toaspire to or lament over. There is no duality in his mind becausewhatever he does, he does for Krsna. Being thus freed from the platformof dualities, he is liberated--even in this material world.
TEXT 4
sankhya-yogau prthag balah
pravadanti na panditahekam apy asthitah samyagubhayor vindate phalam
SYNONYMS
sankhya--analytical study of the material world; yogau--work in
devotional service; prthak--different; balah--the less intelligent;pravadanti--say; na--never; panditah--the learned; ekam--in one; api--even; asthitah--being situated; samyak--complete; ubhayoh--of both;vindate--enjoys; phalam--the result.
TRANSLATIONOnly the ignorant speak of devotional service [karma-yoga] as being
different from the analytical study of the material world [Sankhya].Those who are actually learned say that he who applies himself well toone of these paths achieves the results of both.
PURPORTThe aim of the analytical study of the material world is to find the
soul of existence. The soul of the material world is Visnu, or theSupersoul. Devotional service to the Lord entails service to theSupersoul. One process is to find the root of the tree, and the otheris to water the root. The real student of Sankhya philosophy finds theroot of the material world, Visnu, and then, in perfect knowledge,engages himself in the service of the Lord. Therefore, in essence,there is no difference between the two because the aim of both isVisnu. Those who do not know the ultimate end say that the purposes ofSankhya and karma-yoga are not the same, but one who is learned knowsthe unifying aim in these different processes.
TEXT 5
yat sankhyaih prapyate sthanam
tad yogair api gamyateekam sankhyam ca yogam cayah pasyati sa pasyati
SYNONYMSyat--what; sankhyaih--by means of Sankhya philosophy; prapyate--is
achieved; sthanam--place; tat--that; yogaih--by devotional service;api--also; gamyate--one can attain; ekam--one; sankhyam--analyticalstudy; ca--and; yogam--action in devotion; ca--and; yah--one who;pasyati--sees; sah--he; pasyati--actually sees.
TRANSLATIONOne who knows that the position reached by means of analytical study
can also be attained by devotional service, and who therefore seesanalytical study and devotional service to be on the same level, seesthings as they are.
PURPORTThe real purpose of philosophical research is to find the ultimate goal
of life. Since the ultimate goal of life is self-realization, there isno difference between the conclusions reached by the two processes. BySankhya philosophical research one comes to the conclusion that aliving entity is not a part and parcel of the material world but of thesupreme spirit whole. Consequently, the spirit soul has nothing to dowith the material world; his actions must be in some relation with the
Supreme. When he acts in Krsna consciousness, he is actually in his
constitutional position. In the first process, Sankhya, one has tobecome detached from matter, and in the devotional yoga process one hasto attach himself to the work of Krsna consciousness. Factually, bothprocesses are the same, although superficially one process appears toinvolve detachment and the other process appears to involve attachment.Detachment from matter and attachment to Krsna are one and the same.One who can see this sees things as they are.
TEXT 6
sannyasas tu maha-baho
duhkham aptum ayogatahyoga-yukto munir brahmana cirenadhigacchati
SYNONYMSsannyasah--the renounced order of life; tu--but; maha-baho--O mighty-
armed one; duhkham--distress; aptum--afflicts one with; ayogatah--without devotional service; yoga-yuktah--one engaged in devotionalservice; munih--a thinker; brahma--the Supreme; na cirena--withoutdelay; adhigacchati--attains.
TRANSLATIONMerely renouncing all activities yet not engaging in the devotional
service of the Lord cannot make one happy. But a thoughtful personengaged in devotional service can achieve the Supreme without delay.
PURPORTThere are two classes of sannyasis, or persons in the renounced order
of life. The Mayavadi sannyasis are engaged in the study of Sankhyaphilosophy, whereas the Vaisnava sannyasis are engaged in the study ofBhagavatam philosophy, which affords the proper commentary on theVedanta-sutras. The Mayavadi sannyasis also study the Vedanta-sutras,but use their own commentary, called Sariraka-bhasya, written bySankaracarya. The students of the Bhagavata school are engaged in thedevotional service of the Lord, according to pancaratriki regulations,and therefore the Vaisnava sannyasis have multiple engagements in thetranscendental service of the Lord. The Vaisnava sannyasis have nothingto do with material activities, and yet they perform various activitiesin their devotional service to the Lord. But the Mayavadi sannyasis,engaged in the studies of Sankhya and Vedanta and speculation, cannotrelish the transcendental service of the Lord. Because their studiesbecome very tedious, they sometimes become tired of Brahmanspeculation, and thus they take shelter of the Bhagavatam withoutproper understanding. Consequently their study of the Srimad-Bhagavatambecomes troublesome. Dry speculations and impersonal interpretations byartificial means are all useless for the Mayavadi sannyasis. TheVaisnava sannyasis, who are engaged in devotional service, are happy inthe discharge of their transcendental duties, and they have theguarantee of ultimate entrance into the kingdom of God. The Mayavadisannyasis sometimes fall down from the path of self-realization andagain enter into material activities of a philanthropic and altruisticnature, which are nothing but material engagements. Therefore, theconclusion is that those who are engaged in Krsna conscious activities
are better situated than the sannyasis engaged in simple speculation
about what is Brahman and what is not Brahman, although they too cometo Krsna consciousness, after many births.
TEXT 7
yoga-yukto visuddhatma
vijitatma jitendriyahsarva-bhutatma-bhutatmakurvann api na lipyate
SYNONYMSyoga-yuktah--engaged in devotional service; visuddha-atma--a purified
soul; vijita-atma--self-controlled; jita-indriyah--having conquered thesenses; sarva-bhuta--to all living entities; atma-bhuta-atma--compassionate; kurvan api--although engaged in work; na--never;lipyate--is entangled.
TRANSLATIONOne who works in devotion, who is a pure soul, and who controls his
mind and senses is dear to everyone, and everyone is dear to him.Though always working, such a man is never entangled.
PURPORTOne who is on the path of liberation by Krsna consciousness is very
dear to every living being, and every living being is dear to him. Thisis due to his Krsna consciousness. Such a person cannot think of anyliving being as separate from Krsna, just as the leaves and branches ofa tree are not separate from the tree. He knows very well that bypouring water on the root of the tree, the water will be distributed toall the leaves and branches, or by supplying food to the stomach, theenergy is automatically distributed throughout the body. Because onewho works in Krsna consciousness is servant to all, he is very dear toeveryone. And because everyone is satisfied by his work, he is pure inconsciousness. Because he is pure in consciousness, his mind iscompletely controlled. And because his mind is controlled, his sensesare also controlled. Because his mind is always fixed on Krsna, thereis no chance of his being deviated from Krsna. Nor is there a chancethat he will engage his senses in matters other than the service of theLord. He does not like to hear anything except topics relating toKrsna; he does not like to eat anything which is not offered to Krsna;and he does not wish to go anywhere if Krsna is not involved.Therefore, his senses are controlled. A man of controlled senses cannotbe offensive to anyone. One may ask, "Why then was Arjuna offensive (inbattle) to others? Wasn't he in Krsna consciousness?" Arjuna was onlysuperficially offensive because (as has already been explained in theSecond Chapter) all the assembled persons on the battlefield wouldcontinue to live individually, as the soul cannot be slain. So,spiritually, no one was killed on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra. Onlytheir dresses were changed by the order of Krsna, who was personallypresent. Therefore Arjuna, while fighting on the Battlefield ofKuruksetra, was not really fighting at all; he was simply carrying outthe orders of Krsna in full Krsna consciousness. Such a person is neverentangled in the reactions of work.
TEXTS 8-9
naiva kincit karomiti
yukto manyeta tattva-vitpasyan srnvan sprsan jighrannasnan gacchan svapan svasan
pralapan visrjan grhnann
unmisan nimisann apiindriyanindriyarthesuvartanta iti dharayan
SYNONYMSna--never; eva--certainly; kincit--anything; karomi--I do; iti--thus;
yuktah--engaged in the divine consciousness; manyeta--thinks; tattva-vit--one who knows the truth; pasyan--seeing; srnvan--hearing; sprsan--touching; jighran--smelling; asnan--eating; gacchan--going; svapan--dreaming; svasan--breathing; pralapan--talking; visrjan--giving up;grhnan--accepting; unmisan--opening; nimisan--closing; api--in spiteof; indriyani--the senses; indriya-arthesu--in sense gratification;vartante--let them be so engaged; iti--thus; dharayan--considering.
TRANSLATIONA person in the divine consciousness, although engaged in seeing,
hearing, touching, smelling, eating, moving about, sleeping andbreathing, always knows within himself that he actually does nothing atall. Because while speaking, evacuating, receiving, opening or closinghis eyes, he always knows that only the material senses are engagedwith their objects and that he is aloof from them.
PURPORTA person in Krsna consciousness is pure in his existence, and
consequently he has nothing to do with any work which depends upon fiveimmediate and remote causes, the doer, the work, the situation, theendeavor and fortune. This is because he is engaged in the lovingtranscendental service of Krsna. Although he appears to be acting withhis body and senses, he is always conscious of his actual position,which is spiritual engagement. In material consciousness, the sensesare engaged in sense gratification, but in Krsna consciousness thesenses are engaged in the satisfaction of Krsna's senses. Therefore,the Krsna conscious person is always free, even though he appears to beengaged in things of the senses. Activities such as seeing, hearing,speaking, evacuating, etc., are actions of the senses meant for work. AKrsna conscious person is never affected by the actions of the senses.He cannot perform any act except in the service of the Lord because heknows that he is the eternal servitor of the Lord.
TEXT 10
brahmany adhaya karmani
sangam tyaktva karoti yahlipyate na sa papenapadma-patram ivambhasa
SYNONYMS
brahmani--the Supreme Personality of Godhead; adhaya--resigning unto;
karmani--all works; sangam--attachment; tyaktva--giving up; karoti--performs; yah--who; lipyate--is affected; na--never; sah--he; papena--by sin; padma-patram--lotus leaf; iva--like; ambhasa--in the water.
TRANSLATIONOne who performs his duty without attachment, surrendering the results
unto the Supreme God, is not affected by sinful action, as the lotusleaf is untouched by water.
PURPORTHere brahmani means in Krsna consciousness. The material world is a sum
total manifestation of the three modes of material nature, technicallycalled the pradhana. The Vedic hymns sarvam hy etad brahma (MandukyaUpanisad 2), tasmad etad brahma nama-rupam annam ca jayate (MundakaUpanisad 1.2.10), and, in the Bhagavad-gita (14.3), mama yonir mahadbrahma, indicate that everything in the material world is themanifestation of Brahman; and, although the effects are differentlymanifested, they are nondifferent from the cause. In the Isopanisad itis said that everything is related to the Supreme Brahman, or Krsna,and thus everything belongs to Him only. One who knows perfectly wellthat everything belongs to Krsna, that He is the proprietor ofeverything and that, therefore, everything is engaged in the service ofthe Lord, naturally has nothing to do with the results of hisactivities, whether virtuous or sinful. Even one's material body, beinga gift of the Lord for carrying out a particular type of action, can beengaged in Krsna consciousness. It is beyond contamination by sinfulreactions, exactly as the lotus leaf, though remaining in the water, isnot wet. The Lord also says in the Gita (3.30), mayi sarvani karmanisannyasya: "Resign all works unto Me [Krsna]." The conclusion is that aperson without Krsna consciousness acts according to the concept of thematerial body and senses, but a person in Krsna consciousness actsaccording to the knowledge that the body is the property of Krsna andshould therefore be engaged in the service of Krsna.
TEXT 11
kayena manasa buddhya
kevalair indriyair apiyoginah karma kurvantisangam tyaktvatma-suddhaye
SYNONYMSkayena--with the body; manasa--with the mind; buddhya--with the
intelligence; kevalaih--purified; indriyaih--with the senses; api--evenwith; yoginah--Krsna conscious persons; karma--actions; kurvanti--theyact; sangam--attachment; tyaktva--giving up; atma--self; suddhaye--forthe purpose of purification.
TRANSLATIONThe yogis, abandoning attachment, act with body, mind, intelligence,
and even with the senses, only for the purpose of purification.
PURPORT
By acting in Krsna consciousness for the satisfaction of the senses of
Krsna, any action, whether of the body, mind, intelligence or even thesenses, is purified of material contamination. There are no materialreactions resulting from the activities of a Krsna conscious person.Therefore, purified activities, which are generally called sad-acara,can be easily performed by acting in Krsna consciousness. Sri RupaGosvami in his Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.2.187) describes this asfollows:
iha yasya harer dasye
karmana manasa giranikhilasv apy avasthasujivan-muktah sa ucyate
"A person acting in Krsna consciousness (or, in other words, in the
service of Krsna) with his body, mind, intelligence and words is aliberated person even within the material world, although he may beengaged in many so-called material activities." He has no false ego,nor does he believe that he is this material body, nor that hepossesses the body. He knows that he is not this body and that thisbody does not belong to him. He himself belongs to Krsna, and the bodytoo belongs to Krsna. When he applies everything produced of the body,mind, intelligence, words, life, wealth, etc.--whatever he may havewithin his possession--to Krsna's service, he is at once dovetailedwith Krsna. He is one with Krsna and is devoid of the false ego thatleads one to believe that he is the body, etc. This is the perfectstage of Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 12
yuktah karma-phalam tyaktva
santim apnoti naisthikimayuktah kama-karenaphale sakto nibadhyate
SYNONYMSyuktah--one who is engaged in devotional service; karma-phalam--the
results of all activities; tyaktva--giving up; santim--perfect peace;apnoti--achieves; naisthikim--unflinching; ayuktah--one who is not inKrsna consciousness; kama-karena--for enjoying the result of work;phale--in the result; saktah--attached; nibadhyate--becomes entangled.
TRANSLATIONThe steadily devoted soul attains unadulterated peace because he offers
the result of all activities to Me; whereas a person who is not inunion with the Divine, who is greedy for the fruits of his labor,becomes entangled.
PURPORTThe difference between a person in Krsna consciousness and a person in
bodily consciousness is that the former is attached to Krsna whereasthe latter is attached to the results of his activities. The person whois attached to Krsna and works for Him only is certainly a liberated
person, and he is not anxious for fruitive rewards. In the Bhagavatam,
the cause of anxiety over the result of an activity is explained asbeing one's functioning in the conception of duality, that is, withoutknowledge of the Absolute Truth. Krsna is the Supreme Absolute Truth,the Personality of Godhead. In Krsna consciousness, there is noduality. All that exists is a product of Krsna's energy, and Krsna isall good. Therefore, activities in Krsna consciousness are on theabsolute plane; they are transcendental and have no material effect.One is, therefore, filled with peace in Krsna consciousness. One whois, however, entangled in profit calculation for sense gratificationcannot have that peace. This is the secret of Krsna consciousness--realization that there is no existence besides Krsna is the platform ofpeace and fearlessness.
TEXT 13
sarva-karmani manasa
sannyasyaste sukham vasinava-dvare pure dehinaiva kurvan na karayan
SYNONYMSsarva--all; karmani--activities; manasa--by the mind; sannyasya--giving
up; aste--remains; sukham--in happiness; vasi--one who is controlled;nava-dvare--in the place where there are nine gates; pure--in the city;dehi--the embodied soul; na--never; eva--certainly; kurvan--doinganything; na--not; karayan--causing to be done.
TRANSLATIONWhen the embodied living being controls his nature and mentally
renounces all actions, he resides happily in the city of nine gates[the material body], neither working nor causing work to be done.
PURPORTThe embodied soul lives in the city of nine gates. The activities of
the body, or the figurative city of body, are conducted automaticallyby the particular modes of nature. The soul, although subjectinghimself to the conditions of the body, can be beyond those conditions,if he so desires. Owing only to forgetfulness of his superior nature,he identifies with the material body, and therefore suffers. By Krsnaconsciousness, he can revive his real position and thus come out of hisembodiment. Therefore, when one takes to Krsna consciousness, one atonce becomes completely aloof from bodily activities. In such acontrolled life, in which his deliberations are changed, he liveshappily within the city of nine gates. The nine gates are described asfollows:
nava-dvare pure dehi
hamso lelayate bahihvasi sarvasya lokasyasthavarasya carasya ca
"The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is living within the body of a
living entity, is the controller of all living entities all over theuniverse. The body consists of nine gates [two eyes, two nostrils, two
ears, one mouth, the anus and the genitals]. The living entity in his
conditioned stage identifies himself with the body, but when heidentifies himself with the Lord within himself, he becomes just asfree as the Lord, even while in the body." (Svetasvatara Upanisad 3.18)Therefore, a Krsna conscious person is free from both the outer andinner activities of the material body.
TEXT 14
na kartrtvam na karmani
lokasya srjati prabhuhna karma-phala-samyogamsvabhavas tu pravartate
SYNONYMSna--never; kartrtvam--proprietorship; na--nor; karmani--activities;
lokasya--of the people; srjati--creates; prabhuh--the master of thecity of the body; na--nor; karma-phala--with the results of activities;samyogam--connection; svabhavah--the modes of material nature; tu--but;pravartate--act.
TRANSLATIONThe embodied spirit, master of the city of his body, does not create
activities, nor does he induce people to act, nor does he create thefruits of action. All this is enacted by the modes of material nature.
PURPORTThe living entity, as will be explained in the Seventh Chapter, is one
of the energies or natures of the Supreme Lord but is distinct frommatter, which is another nature--called inferior--of the Lord. Somehowthe superior nature, the living entity, has been in contact withmaterial nature since time immemorial. The temporary body or materialdwelling place which he obtains is the cause of varieties of activitiesand their resultant reactions. Living in such a conditional atmosphere,one suffers the results of the activities of the body by identifyinghimself (in ignorance) with the body. It is ignorance acquired fromtime immemorial that is the cause of bodily suffering and distress. Assoon as the living entity becomes aloof from the activities of thebody, he becomes free from the reactions as well. As long as he is inthe city of body, he appears to be the master of it, but actually he isneither its proprietor nor controller of its actions and reactions. Heis simply in the midst of the material ocean, struggling for existence.The waves of the ocean are tossing him, and he has no control overthem. His best solution is to get out of the water by transcendentalKrsna consciousness. That alone will save him from all turmoil.
TEXT 15
nadatte kasyacit papam
na caiva sukrtam vibhuhajnanenavrtam jnanamtena muhyanti jantavah
SYNONYMS
na--never; adatte--accepts; kasyacit--anyone's; papam--sin; na--nor;
ca--also; eva--certainly; su-krtam--pious activities; vibhuh--theSupreme Lord; ajnanena--by ignorance; avrtam--covered; jnanam--knowledge; tena--by that; muhyanti--are bewildered; jantavah--theliving entities.
TRANSLATIONNor does the Supreme Lord assume anyone's sinful or pious activities.
Embodied beings, however, are bewildered because of the ignorance whichcovers their real knowledge.
PURPORTThe Sanskrit word vibhu means the Supreme Lord who is full of unlimited
knowledge, riches, strength, fame, beauty and renunciation. He isalways satisfied in Himself, undisturbed by sinful or pious activities.He does not create a particular situation for any living entity, butthe living entity, bewildered by ignorance, desires to be put intocertain conditions of life, and thereby his chain of action andreaction begins. A living entity is, by superior nature, full ofknowledge. Nevertheless, he is prone to be influenced by ignorance dueto his limited power. The Lord is omnipotent, but the living entity isnot. The Lord is vibhu, or omniscient, but the living entity is anu, oratomic. Because he is a living soul, he has the capacity to desire byhis free will. Such desire is fulfilled only by the omnipotent Lord.And so, when the living entity is bewildered in his desires, the Lordallows him to fulfill those desires, but the Lord is never responsiblefor the actions and reactions of the particular situation which may bedesired. Being in a bewildered condition, therefore, the embodied soulidentifies himself with the circumstantial material body and becomessubjected to the temporary misery and happiness of life. The Lord isthe constant companion of the living entity as Paramatma, or theSupersoul, and therefore He can understand the desires of theindividual soul, as one can smell the flavor of a flower by being nearit. Desire is a subtle form of conditioning for the living entity. TheLord fulfills his desire as he deserves: Man proposes and God disposes.The individual is not, therefore, omnipotent in fulfilling his desires.The Lord, however, can fulfill all desires, and the Lord, being neutralto everyone, does not interfere with the desires of the minuteindependent living entities. However, when one desires Krsna, the Lordtakes special care and encourages one to desire in such a way that onecan attain to Him and be eternally happy. The Vedic hymns thereforedeclare:
esa u hy eva sadhu karma karayati tam yam ebhyo lokebhya unninisate.
esa u evasadhu karma karayati yam adho ninisate
"The Lord engages the living entity in pious activities so that he may
be elevated. The Lord engages him in impious activities so that he maygo to hell." (Kausitaki Upanisad 3.8)
ajno jantur aniso 'yam
atmanah sukha-duhkhayohisvara-prerito gacchetsvargam vasv abhram eva ca
"The living entity is completely dependent in his distress and
happiness. By the will of the Supreme he can go to heaven or hell, as acloud is driven by the air."Therefore the embodied soul, by his immemorial desire to avoid Krsnaconsciousness, causes his own bewilderment. Consequently, although heis constitutionally eternal, blissful and cognizant, due to thelittleness of his existence he forgets his constitutional position ofservice to the Lord and is thus entrapped by nescience. And, under thespell of ignorance, the living entity claims that the Lord isresponsible for his conditional existence. The Vedanta-sutras (2.1.34)also confirm this. Vaisamya-nairghrnye na sapeksatvat tatha hidarsayati: "The Lord neither hates nor likes anyone, though He appearsto."
TEXT 16
jnanena tu tad ajnanam
yesam nasitam atmanahtesam aditya-vaj jnanamprakasayati tat param
SYNONYMSjnanena--by knowledge; tu--but; tat--that; ajnanam--nescience; yesam--
whose; nasitam--is destroyed; atmanah--of the living entity; tesam--their; aditya-vat--like the rising sun; jnanam--knowledge; prakasayati--discloses; tat param--Krsna consciousness.
TRANSLATION
When, however, one is enlightened with the knowledge by which nescience
is destroyed, then his knowledge reveals everything, as the sun lightsup everything in the daytime.
PURPORTThose who have forgotten Krsna must certainly be bewildered, but those
who are in Krsna consciousness are not bewildered at all. It is statedin the Bhagavad-gita, sarvam jnana-plavena, jnanagnih sarva-karmani andna hi jnanena sadrsam. Knowledge is always highly esteemed. And what isthat knowledge? Perfect knowledge is achieved when one surrenders untoKrsna, as is said in the Seventh Chapter, 19th verse: bahunam janmanamante jnanavan mam prapadyate. After passing through many, many births,when one perfect in knowledge surrenders unto Krsna, or when oneattains Krsna consciousness, then everything is revealed to him, aseverything is revealed by the sun in the daytime. The living entity isbewildered in so many ways. For instance, when he unceremoniouslythinks himself God, he actually falls into the last snare of nescience.If a living entity is God, then how can he become bewildered bynescience? Does God become bewildered by nescience? If so, thennescience, or Satan, is greater than God. Real knowledge can beobtained from a person who is in perfect Krsna consciousness.Therefore, one has to seek out such a bona fide spiritual master and,under him, learn what Krsna consciousness is, for Krsna consciousnesswill certainly drive away all nescience, as the sun drives awaydarkness. Even though a person may be in full knowledge that he is notthis body but is transcendental to the body, he still may not be able
to discriminate between the soul and the Supersoul. However, he can
know everything well if he cares to take shelter of the perfect, bonafide Krsna conscious spiritual master. One can know God and one'srelationship with God only when one actually meets a representative ofGod. A representative of God never claims that he is God, although heis paid all the respect ordinarily paid to God because he has knowledgeof God. One has to learn the distinction between God and the livingentity. Lord Sri Krsna therefore stated in the Second Chapter (2.12)that every living being is individual and that the Lord also isindividual. They were all individuals in the past, they are individualsat present, and they will continue to be individuals in the future,even after liberation. At night we see everything as one in thedarkness, but in day, when the sun is up, we see everything in its realidentity. Identity with individuality in spiritual life is realknowledge.
TEXT 17
tad-buddhayas tad-atmanas
tan-nisthas tat-parayanahgacchanty apunar-avrttimjnana-nirdhuta-kalmasah
SYNONYMStat-buddhayah--one whose intelligence is always in the Supreme; tat-
atmanah--one whose mind is always in the Supreme; tat-nisthah--whosemind is only meant for the Supreme; tat-parayanah--who has completelytaken shelter of Him; gacchanti--go; apunah-avrttim--liberation; jnana--knowledge; nirdhuta--cleanses; kalmasah--misgivings.
TRANSLATIONWhen one's intelligence, mind, faith and refuge are all fixed in the
Supreme, then one becomes fully cleansed of misgivings through completeknowledge and thus proceeds straight on the path of liberation.
PURPORTThe Supreme Transcendental Truth is Lord Krsna. The whole Bhagavad-gita
centers around the declaration that Krsna is the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. That is the version of all Vedic literature. Para-tattva meansthe Supreme Reality, who is understood by the knowers of the Supreme asBrahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan. Bhagavan, or the Supreme Personalityof Godhead, is the last word in the Absolute. There is nothing morethan that. The Lord says, mattah parataram nanyat kincid astidhananjaya. Impersonal Brahman is also supported by Krsna: brahmano hipratisthaham. Therefore in all ways Krsna is the Supreme Reality. Onewhose mind, intelligence, faith and refuge are always in Krsna, or, inother words, one who is fully in Krsna consciousness, is undoubtedlywashed clean of all misgivings and is in perfect knowledge ineverything concerning transcendence. A Krsna conscious person canthoroughly understand that there is duality (simultaneous identity andindividuality) in Krsna, and, equipped with such transcendentalknowledge, one can make steady progress on the path of liberation.
TEXT 18
vidya-vinaya-sampanne
brahmane gavi hastinisuni caiva sva-pake capanditah sama-darsinah
SYNONYMSvidya--education; vinaya--gentleness; sampanne--fully equipped;
brahmane--in the brahmana; gavi--in the cow; hastini--in the elephant;suni--in the dog; ca--and; eva--certainly; sva-pake--in the dog-eater(the outcaste); ca--respectively; panditah--those who are so wise;sama-darsinah--do see with equal vision.
TRANSLATIONThe humble sage, by virtue of true knowledge, sees with equal vision a
learned and gentle brahmana, a cow, an elephant, a dog and a dog-eater[outcaste].
PURPORTA Krsna conscious person does not make any distinction between species
or castes. The brahmana and the outcaste may be different from thesocial point of view, or a dog, a cow, and an elephant may be differentfrom the point of view of species, but these differences of body aremeaningless from the viewpoint of a learned transcendentalist. This isdue to their relationship to the Supreme, for the Supreme Lord, by Hisplenary portion as Paramatma, is present in everyone's heart. Such anunderstanding of the Supreme is real knowledge. As far as the bodiesare concerned in different castes or different species of life, theLord is equally kind to everyone because He treats every living beingas a friend yet maintains Himself as Paramatma regardless of thecircumstances of the living entities. The Lord as Paramatma is presentin both the outcaste and in the brahmana, although the body of abrahmana and that of an outcaste are not the same. The bodies arematerial productions of different modes of material nature, but thesoul and the Supersoul within the body are of the same spiritualquality. The similarity in the quality of the soul and the Supersoul,however, does not make them equal in quantity, for the individual soulis present only in that particular body whereas the Paramatma ispresent in each and every body. A Krsna conscious person has fullknowledge of this, and therefore he is truly learned and has equalvision. The similar characteristics of the soul and the Supersoul arethat they are both conscious, eternal and blissful. But the differenceis that the individual soul is conscious within the limitedjurisdiction of the body whereas the Supersoul is conscious of allbodies. The Supersoul is present in all bodies without distinction.
TEXT 19
ihaiva tair jitah sargo
yesam samye sthitam manahnirdosam hi samam brahmatasmad brahmani te sthitah
SYNONYMS
iha--in this life; eva--certainly; taih--by them; jitah--conquered;
sargah--birth and death; yesam--of those; samye--in equanimity;sthitam--so situated; manah--mind; nirdosam--flawless; hi--certainly;samam--in equanimity; brahma--the Supreme; tasmat--therefore; brahmani--in the Supreme; te--they; sthitah--are situated.
TRANSLATIONThose whose minds are established in sameness and equanimity have
already conquered the conditions of birth and death. They are flawlesslike Brahman, and thus they are already situated in Brahman.
PURPORTEquanimity of mind, as mentioned above, is the sign of self-
realization. Those who have actually attained to such a stage should beconsidered to have conquered material conditions, specifically birthand death. As long as one identifies with this body, he is considered aconditioned soul, but as soon as he is elevated to the stage ofequanimity through realization of self, he is liberated fromconditional life. In other words, he is no longer subject to take birthin the material world but can enter into the spiritual sky after hisdeath. The Lord is flawless because He is without attraction or hatred.Similarly, when a living entity is without attraction or hatred, healso becomes flawless and eligible to enter into the spiritual sky.Such persons are to be considered already liberated, and their symptomsare described below.
TEXT 20
na prahrsyet priyam prapya
nodvijet prapya capriyamsthira-buddhir asammudhobrahma-vid brahmani sthitah
SYNONYMSna--never; prahrsyet--rejoice; priyam--pleasant; prapya--achieving; na-
-does not; udvijet--agitated; prapya--obtaining; ca--also; apriyam--unpleasant; sthira-buddhih--self-intelligent; asammudhah--unbewildered;brahma-vit--one who knows the Supreme perfectly; brahmani--in thetranscendence; sthitah--situated.
TRANSLATIONA person who neither rejoices upon achieving something pleasant nor
laments upon obtaining something unpleasant, who is self-intelligent,unbewildered, and who knows the science of God, is to be understood asalready situated in transcendence.
PURPORTThe symptoms of the self-realized person are given herein. The first
symptom is that he is not illusioned by the false identification of thebody with his true self. He knows perfectly well that he is not thisbody, but is the fragmental portion of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. He is therefore not joyful in achieving something, nor does helament in losing anything which is related to his body. This steadiness
of mind is called sthira-buddhi, or self-intelligence. He is therefore
never bewildered by mistaking the gross body for the soul, nor does heaccept the body as permanent and disregard the existence of the soul.This knowledge elevates him to the station of knowing the completescience of the Absolute Truth, namely Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan.He thus knows his constitutional position perfectly well, withoutfalsely trying to become one with the Supreme in all respects. This iscalled Brahman realization, or self-realization. Such steadyconsciousness is called Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 21
bahya-sparsesv asaktatma
vindaty atmani yat sukhamsa brahma-yoga-yuktatmasukham aksayam asnute
SYNONYMSbahya-sparsesu--in external sense pleasure; asakta-atma--one who is not
so attached; vindati--enjoys; atmani--in the self; yat--that which;sukham--happiness; sah--that; brahma-yoga--concentrated in Brahman;yukta-atma--self-connected; sukham--happiness; aksayam--unlimited;asnute--enjoys.
TRANSLATIONSuch a liberated person is not attracted to material sense pleasure or
external objects but is always in trance, enjoying the pleasure within.In this way the self-realized person enjoys unlimited happiness, for heconcentrates on the Supreme.
PURPORTSri Yamunacarya, a great devotee in Krsna consciousness, said:yad-avadhi mama cetah krsna-padaravinde
nava-nava-rasa-dhamany udyatam rantum asittad-avadhi bata nari-sangame smaryamanebhavati mukha-vikarah susthu nisthivanam ca
"Since I have been engaged in the transcendental loving service of
Krsna, realizing ever-new pleasure in Him, whenever I think of sexpleasure, I spit at the thought, and my lips curl with distaste." Aperson in brahma-yoga, or Krsna consciousness, is so absorbed in theloving service of the Lord that he loses his taste for material sensepleasure altogether. The highest pleasure in terms of matter is sexpleasure. The whole world is moving under its spell, and a materialistcannot work at all without this motivation. But a person engaged inKrsna consciousness can work with greater vigor without sex pleasure,which he avoids. That is the test in spiritual realization. Spiritualrealization and sex pleasure go ill together. A Krsna conscious personis not attracted to any kind of sense pleasure due to his being aliberated soul.
TEXT 22
ye hi samsparsa-ja bhoga
duhkha-yonaya eva te
ady-antavantah kaunteyana tesu ramate budhah
SYNONYMSye--those; hi--certainly; samsparsa-jah--by contact with the material
senses; bhogah--enjoyments; duhkha--distress; yonayah--sources of; eva--certainly; te--they are; adi--beginning; anta--end; vantah--subjectto; kaunteya--O son of Kunti; na--never; tesu--in those; ramate--takesdelight; budhah--the intelligent person.
TRANSLATIONAn intelligent person does not take part in the sources of misery,
which are due to contact with the material senses. O son of Kunti, suchpleasures have a beginning and an end, and so the wise man does notdelight in them.
PURPORTMaterial sense pleasures are due to the contact of the material senses,
which are all temporary because the body itself is temporary. Aliberated soul is not interested in anything which is temporary.Knowing well the joys of transcendental pleasures, how can a liberatedsoul agree to enjoy false pleasure? In the Padma Purana it is said:
ramante yogino 'nante
satyanande cid-atmaniiti rama-padenasauparam brahmabhidhiyate
"The mystics derive unlimited transcendental pleasures from the
Absolute Truth, and therefore the Supreme Absolute Truth, thePersonality of Godhead, is also known as Rama."In the Srimad-Bhagavatam also (5.5.1) it is said:
nayam deho deha-bhajam nr-loke
kastan kaman arhate vid-bhujam yetapo divyam putraka yena sattvamsuddhyed yasmad brahma-saukhyam tv anantam
"My dear sons, there is no reason to labor very hard for sense pleasure
while in this human form of life; such pleasures are available to thestool-eaters [hogs]. Rather, you should undergo penances in this lifeby which your existence will be purified, and, as a result, you will beable to enjoy unlimited transcendental bliss."Therefore, those who are true yogis or learned transcendentalists arenot attracted by sense pleasures, which are the causes of continuousmaterial existence. The more one is addicted to material pleasures, themore he is entrapped by material miseries.
TEXT 23
saknotihaiva yah sodhum
prak sarira-vimoksanatkama-krodhodbhavam vegamsa yuktah sa sukhi narah
SYNONYMS
saknoti--able to do; iha eva--in the present body; yah--one who;
sodhum--to tolerate; prak--before; sarira--body; vimoksanat--give up;kama--desire; krodha--anger; udbhavam--generated from; vegam--urge;sah--he; yuktah--in trance; sah--he; sukhi--happy; narah--human being.
TRANSLATIONBefore giving up this present body, if one is able to tolerate the
urges of the material senses and check the force of desire and anger,he is a yogi and is happy in this world.
PURPORTIf one wants to make steady progress on the path of self-realization,
he must try to control the forces of the material senses. There are theforces of talk, forces of anger, forces of mind, forces of the stomach,forces of the genitals, and forces of the tongue. One who is able tocontrol the forces of all these different senses, and the mind, iscalled gosvami, or svami. Such gosvamis live strictly controlled lives,and forgo altogether the forces of the senses. Material desires, whenunsatiated, generate anger, and thus the mind, eyes and chest becomeagitated. Therefore, one must practice to control them before one givesup this material body. One who can do this is understood to be self-realized and is thus happy in the state of self-realization. It is theduty of the transcendentalist to try strenuously to control desire andanger.
TEXT 24
yo 'ntah-sukho 'ntar-aramas
tathantar-jyotir eva yahsa yogi brahma-nirvanambrahma-bhuto 'dhigacchati
SYNONYMSyah--one who; antah-sukhah--happy from within; antah-aramah--active
within; tatha--as well as; antah-jyotih--aiming within; eva--certainly;yah--anyone; sah--he; yogi--mystic; brahma-nirvanam--liberated in theSupreme; brahma-bhutah--self-realized; adhigacchati--attains.
TRANSLATIONOne whose happiness is within, who is active within, who rejoices
within and is illumined within, is actually the perfect mystic. He isliberated in the Supreme, and ultimately he attains the Supreme.
PURPORTUnless one is able to relish happiness from within, how can one retire
from the external engagements meant for deriving superficial happiness?A liberated person enjoys happiness by factual experience. He can,therefore, sit silently at any place and enjoy the activities of lifefrom within. Such a liberated person no longer desires external
material happiness. This state is called brahma-bhuta, attaining which
one is assured of going back to Godhead, back to home.
TEXT 25
labhante brahma-nirvanam
rsayah ksina-kalmasahchinna-dvaidha yatatmanahsarva-bhuta-hite ratah
SYNONYMSlabhante--achieve; brahma-nirvanam--liberation in the Supreme; rsayah--
those who are active within; ksina-kalmasah--who are devoid of allsins; chinna--torn off; dvaidhah--duality; yata-atmanah--engaged inself-realization; sarva-bhuta--in all living entities; hite--in welfarework; ratah--engaged.
TRANSLATIONOne who is beyond duality and doubt, whose mind is engaged within, who
is always busy working for the welfare of all sentient beings, and whois free from all sins, achieves liberation in the Supreme.
PURPORTOnly a person who is fully in Krsna consciousness can be said to be
engaged in welfare work for all living entities. When a person isactually in the knowledge that Krsna is the fountainhead of everything,then when he acts in that spirit he acts for everyone. The sufferingsof humanity are due to forgetfulness of Krsna as the supreme enjoyer,the supreme proprietor, and the supreme friend. Therefore, to act torevive this consciousness within the entire human society is thehighest welfare work. One cannot be engaged in first-class welfare workwithout being liberated in the Supreme. A Krsna conscious person has nodoubt about the supremacy of Krsna. He has no doubt because he iscompletely freed from all sins. This is the state of divine love.A person engaged only in ministering to the physical welfare of humansociety cannot factually help anyone. Temporary relief of the externalbody and the mind is not satisfactory. The real cause of one'sdifficulties in the hard struggle for life may be found in one'sforgetfulness of his relationship with the Supreme Lord. When a man isfully conscious of his relationship with Krsna, he is actually aliberated soul, although he may be in the material tabernacle.
TEXT 26
kama-krodha-vimuktanam
yatinam yata-cetasamabhito brahma-nirvanamvartate viditatmanam
SYNONYMSkama--desires; krodha--anger; vimuktanam--of those who are so
liberated; yatinam--of the saintly persons; yata-cetasam--of personswho have full control over the mind; abhitah--assured in the near
future; brahma-nirvanam--liberation in the Supreme; vartate--is there;
vidita-atmanam--of those who are self-realized.
TRANSLATIONThose who are free from anger and all material desires, who are self-
realized, self-disciplined and constantly endeavoring for perfection,are assured of liberation in the Supreme in the very near future.
PURPORTOf the saintly persons who are constantly engaged in striving toward
salvation, one who is in Krsna consciousness is the best of all. TheBhagavatam (4.22.39) confirms this fact as follows:
yat-pada-pankaja-palasa-vilasa-bhaktya
karmasayam grathitam udgrathayanti santahtadvan na rikta-matayo yatayo 'pi ruddha-sroto-ganas tam aranam bhaja vasudevam
"Just try to worship, in devotional service, Vasudeva, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Even great sages are not able to control theforces of the senses as effectively as those who are engaged intranscendental bliss by serving the lotus feet of the Lord, uprootingthe deep grown desire for fruitive activities."In the conditioned soul the desire to enjoy the fruitive results ofwork is so deep-rooted that it is very difficult even for the greatsages to control such desires, despite great endeavors. A devotee ofthe Lord, constantly engaged in devotional service in Krsnaconsciousness, perfect in self-realization, very quickly attainsliberation in the Supreme. Owing to his complete knowledge in self-realization, he always remains in trance. To cite an analogous exampleof this:
darsana-dhyana-samsparsair
matsya-kurma-vihangamahsvany apatyani pusnantitathaham api padma-ja
"By vision, by meditation and by touch only do the fish, the tortoise
and the birds maintain their offspring. Similarly do I also, OPadmaja!"The fish brings up its offspring simply by looking at them. Thetortoise brings up its offspring simply by meditation. The eggs of thetortoise are laid on land, and the tortoise meditates on the eggs whilein the water. Similarly, a devotee in Krsna consciousness, although faraway from the Lord's abode, can elevate himself to that abode simply bythinking of Him constantly--by engagement in Krsna consciousness. Hedoes not feel the pangs of material miseries; this state of life iscalled brahma-nirvana, or the absence of material miseries due to beingconstantly immersed in the Supreme.
TEXTS 27-28
sparsan krtva bahir bahyams
caksus caivantare bhruvohpranapanau samau krtvanasabhyantara-carinau
yatendriya-mano-buddhir
munir moksa-parayanahvigateccha-bhaya-krodhoyah sada mukta eva sah
SYNONYMSsparsan--external sense objects, such as sound, etc.; krtva--keeping;
bahih--external; bahyan--unnecessary; caksuh--eyes; ca--also; eva--certainly; antare--within; bhruvoh--of the eyebrows; prana-apanau--up-and down-moving air; samau--in suspension; krtva--doing so; nasa-abhyantara--within the nostrils; carinau--blowing; yata--controlled;indriya--senses; manah--mind; buddhih--intelligence; munih--thetranscendentalist; moksa--liberation; parayanah--being so destined;vigata--discarded; iccha--wishes; bhaya--fear; krodhah--anger; yah--onewho; sada--always; muktah--liberated; eva--certainly; sah--he is.
TRANSLATIONShutting out all external sense objects, keeping the eyes and vision
concentrated between the two eyebrows, suspending the inward andoutward breaths within the nostrils--thus controlling the mind, sensesand intelligence, the transcendentalist becomes free from desire, fearand anger. One who is always in this state is certainly liberated.
PURPORTBeing engaged in Krsna consciousness, one can immediately understand
one's spiritual identity, and then one can understand the Supreme Lordby means of devotional service. When he is well situated in devotionalservice, one comes to the transcendental position, qualified to feelthe presence of the Lord in the sphere of one's activity. Thisparticular position is called liberation in the Supreme.After explaining the above principles of liberation in the Supreme, theLord gives instruction to Arjuna as to how one can come to thatposition by the practice of the mysticism or yoga, known as astanga-yoga, which is divisible into an eightfold procedure called yama,niyama, asana, pranayama, pratyahara, dharana, dhyana, and samadhi. Inthe Sixth Chapter the subject of yoga is explicitly detailed, and atthe end of the Fifth it is only preliminarily explained. One has todrive out the sense objects such as sound, touch, form, taste and smellby the pratyahara (breathing) process in yoga, and then keep the visionof the eyes between the two eyebrows and concentrate on the tip of thenose with half closed lids. There is no benefit in closing the eyesaltogether, because then there is every chance of falling asleep. Noris there benefit in opening the eyes completely, because then there isthe hazard of being attracted by sense objects. The breathing movementis restrained within the nostrils by neutralizing the up- and down-moving air within the body. By practice of such yoga one is able togain control over the senses, refrain from outward sense objects, andthus prepare oneself for liberation in the Supreme.This yoga process helps one become free from all kinds of fear andanger and thus feel the presence of the Supersoul in the transcendentalsituation. In other words, Krsna consciousness is the easiest processof executing yoga principles. This will be thoroughly explained in thenext chapter. A Krsna conscious person, however, being always engagedin devotional service, does not risk losing his senses to some other
engagement. This is a better way of controlling the senses than by the
astanga-yoga.
TEXT 29
bhoktaram yajna-tapasam
sarva-loka-mahesvaramsuhrdam sarva-bhutanamjnatva mam santim rcchati
SYNONYMSbhoktaram--beneficiary; yajna--sacrifices; tapasam--of penances and
austerities; sarva-loka--all planets and the demigods thereof; maha-isvaram--the Supreme Lord; su-hrdam--benefactor; sarva--all; bhutanam--of the living entities; jnatva--thus knowing; mam--Me (Lord Krsna);santim--relief from material pangs; rcchati--achieves.
TRANSLATIONThe sages, knowing Me as the ultimate purpose of all sacrifices and
austerities, the Supreme Lord of all planets and demigods and thebenefactor and well-wisher of all living entities, attain peace fromthe pangs of material miseries.
PURPORTThe conditioned souls within the clutches of illusory energy are all
anxious to attain peace in the material world. But they do not know theformula for peace, which is explained in this part of the Bhagavad-gita. The greatest peace formula is simply this: Lord Krsna is thebeneficiary in all human activities. Men should offer everything to thetranscendental service of the Lord because He is the proprietor of allplanets and the demigods thereon. No one is greater than He. He isgreater than the greatest of the demigods, Lord Siva and Lord Brahma.In the Vedas (Svetasvatara Upanisad 6.7) the Supreme Lord is describedas tam isvaranam paramam mahesvaram. Under the spell of illusion,living entities are trying to be lords of all they survey, but actuallythey are dominated by the material energy of the Lord. The Lord is themaster of material nature, and the conditioned souls are under thestringent rules of material nature. Unless one understands these barefacts, it is not possible to achieve peace in the world eitherindividually or collectively. This is the sense of Krsna consciousness:Lord Krsna is the supreme predominator, and all living entities,including the great demigods, are His subordinates. One can attainperfect peace only in complete Krsna consciousness.This Fifth Chapter is a practical explanation of Krsna consciousness,generally known as karma-yoga. The question of mental speculation as tohow karma-yoga can give liberation is answered herewith. To work inKrsna consciousness is to work with the complete knowledge of the Lordas the predominator. Such work is not different from transcendentalknowledge. Direct Krsna consciousness is bhakti-yoga, and jnana-yoga isa path leading to bhakti-yoga. Krsna consciousness means to work infull knowledge of one's relationship with the Supreme Absolute, and theperfection of this consciousness is full knowledge of Krsna, or theSupreme Personality of Godhead. A pure soul is the eternal servant ofGod as His fragmental part and parcel. He comes into contact with maya(illusion) due to the desire to lord it over maya, and that is the
cause of his many sufferings. As long as he is in contact with matter,
he has to execute work in terms of material necessities. Krsnaconsciousness, however, brings one into spiritual life even while oneis within the jurisdiction of matter, for it is an arousing ofspiritual existence by practice in the material world. The more one isadvanced, the more he is freed from the clutches of matter. The Lord isnot partial toward anyone. Everything depends on one's practicalperformance of duties in an effort to control the senses and conquerthe influence of desire and anger. And, attaining Krsna consciousnessby controlling the above-mentioned passions, one remains factually inthe transcendental stage, or brahma-nirvana. The eightfold yogamysticism is automatically practiced in Krsna consciousness because theultimate purpose is served. There is a gradual process of elevation inthe practice of yama, niyama, asana, pratyahara, dhyana, dharana,pranayama, and samadhi. But these only preface perfection by devotionalservice, which alone can award peace to the human being. It is thehighest perfection of life.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Fifth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Karma-yoga, or Action in KrsnaConsciousness.
Chapter 6
Sankhya-yoga
TEXT 1
sri-bhagavan uvaca
anasritah karma-phalamkaryam karma karoti yahsa sannyasi ca yogi cana niragnir na cakriyah
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Lord said; anasritah--without shelter; karma-
phalam--the result of work; karyam--obligatory; karma--work; karoti--performs; yah--one who; sah--he; sannyasi--in the renounced order; ca--also; yogi--mystic; ca--also; na--not; nih--without; agnih--fire; na--nor; ca--also; akriyah--without duty.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: One who is unattached to the fruits of his work
and who works as he is obligated is in the renounced order of life, andhe is the true mystic: not he who lights no fire and performs no work.
PURPORTIn this chapter the Lord explains that the process of the eightfold
yoga system is a means to control the mind and the senses. However,this is very difficult for people in general to perform, especially inthe Age of Kali. Although the eightfold yoga system is recommended inthis chapter, the Lord emphasizes that the process of karma-yoga, oracting in Krsna consciousness, is better. Everyone acts in this worldto maintain his family and their paraphernalia, but no one is workingwithout some self-interest, some personal gratification, be itconcentrated or extended. The criterion of perfection is to act in
Krsna consciousness, and not with a view to enjoying the fruits of
work. To act in Krsna consciousness is the duty of every living entitybecause all are constitutionally parts and parcels of the Supreme. Theparts of the body work for the satisfaction of the whole body. Thelimbs of the body do not act for self-satisfaction but for thesatisfaction of the complete whole. Similarly, the living entity whoacts for satisfaction of the supreme whole and not for personalsatisfaction is the perfect sannyasi, the perfect yogi.The sannyasis sometimes artificially think that they have becomeliberated from all material duties, and therefore they cease to performagnihotra yajnas (fire sacrifices), but actually they are self-interested because their goal is becoming one with the impersonalBrahman. Such a desire is greater than any material desire, but it isnot without self-interest. Similarly, the mystic yogi who practices theyoga system with half-open eyes, ceasing all material activities,desires some satisfaction for his personal self. But a person acting inKrsna consciousness works for the satisfaction of the whole, withoutself-interest. A Krsna conscious person has no desire for self-satisfaction. His criterion of success is the satisfaction of Krsna,and thus he is the perfect sannyasi, or perfect yogi. Lord Caitanya,the highest perfectional symbol of renunciation, prays in this way:
na dhanam na janam na sundarim
kavitam va jagad-isa kamayemama janmani janmanisvarebhavatad bhaktir ahaituki tvayi
"O Almighty Lord, I have no desire to accumulate wealth, nor to enjoy
beautiful women. Nor do I want any number of followers. What I wantonly is the causeless mercy of Your devotional service in my life,birth after birth."
TEXT 2
yam sannyasam iti prahur
yogam tam viddhi pandavana hy asannyasta-sankalpoyogi bhavati kascana
SYNONYMSyam--what; sannyasam--renunciation; iti--thus; prahuh--they say; yogam-
-linking with the Supreme; tam--that; viddhi--you must know; pandava--Oson of Pandu; na--never; hi--certainly; asannyasta--without giving up;sankalpah--self-satisfaction; yogi--a mystic transcendentalist;bhavati--becomes; kascana--anyone.
TRANSLATIONWhat is called renunciation is the same as yoga, or linking oneself
with the Supreme, for no one can become a yogi unless he renounces thedesire for sense gratification.
PURPORTReal sannyasa-yoga or bhakti means that one should know his
constitutional position as the living entity, and act accordingly. Theliving entity has no separate independent identity. He is the marginal
energy of the Supreme. When he is entrapped by material energy, he is
conditioned, and when he is Krsna conscious, or aware of the spiritualenergy, then he is in his real and natural state of life. Therefore,when one is in complete knowledge, one ceases all material sensegratification, or renounces all kinds of sense gratificatoryactivities. This is practiced by the yogis who restrain the senses frommaterial attachment. But a person in Krsna consciousness has noopportunity to engage his senses in anything which is not for thepurpose of Krsna. Therefore, a Krsna conscious person is simultaneouslya sannyasi and a yogi. The purpose of knowledge and of restraining thesenses, as prescribed in the jnana and yoga processes, is automaticallyserved in Krsna consciousness. If one is unable to give up theactivities of his selfish nature, then jnana and yoga are of no avail.The real aim is for a living entity to give up all selfish satisfactionand to be prepared to satisfy the Supreme. A Krsna conscious person hasno desire for any kind of self-enjoyment. He is always engaged for theenjoyment of the Supreme. One who has no information of the Suprememust therefore be engaged in self-satisfaction, because no one canstand on the platform of inactivity. All purposes are perfectly servedby the practice of Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 3
aruruksor muner yogam
karma karanam ucyateyogarudhasya tasyaivasamah karanam ucyate
SYNONYMSaruruksoh--of one who has just begun yoga; muneh--of the sage; yogam--
the eightfold yoga system; karma--work; karanam--the cause; ucyate--issaid to be; yoga--eightfold yoga; arudhasya--of one who has attained;tasya--his; eva--certainly; samah--cessation of all materialactivities; karanam--the cause; ucyate--is said to be.
TRANSLATIONFor one who is a neophyte in the eightfold yoga system, work is said to
be the means; and for one who has already attained to yoga, cessationof all material activities is said to be the means.
PURPORTThe process of linking oneself with the Supreme is called yoga, which
may be compared to a ladder for attaining the topmost spiritualrealization. This ladder begins from the lowest material condition ofthe living entity and rises up to perfect self-realization in purespiritual life. According to various elevations, different parts of theladder are known by different names. But all in all, the completeladder is called yoga and may be divided into three parts, namelyjnana-yoga, dhyana-yoga and bhakti-yoga. The beginning of the ladder iscalled the yogaruruksu stage, and the highest rung is called yogarudha.Concerning the eightfold yoga system, attempts in the beginning toenter into meditation through regulative principles of life andpractice of different sitting postures (which are more or less bodilyexercises) are considered fruitive material activities. All suchactivities lead to achieving perfect mental equilibrium to control the
senses. When one is accomplished in the practice of meditation, he
ceases all disturbing mental activities.A Krsna conscious person is, however, situated from the beginning onthe platform of meditation because he always thinks of Krsna. And,being constantly engaged in the service of Krsna, he is considered tohave ceased all material activities.
TEXT 4
yada hi nendriyarthesu
na karmasv anusajjatesarva-sankalpa-sannyasiyogarudhas tadocyate
SYNONYMSyada--when; hi--certainly; na--not; indriya-arthesu--in sense
gratification; na--never; karmasu--in fruitive activities; anusajjate--does necessarily engage; sarva-sankalpa--all material desires;sannyasi--renouncer; yoga-arudhah--elevated in yoga; tada--at thattime; ucyate--is said to be.
TRANSLATIONA person is said to be have attained to yoga when, having renounced all
material desires, he neither acts for sense gratification nor engagesin fruitive activities.
PURPORTWhen a person is fully engaged in the transcendental loving service of
the Lord, he is pleased in himself, and thus he is no longer engaged insense gratification or in fruitive activities. Otherwise, one must beengaged in sense gratification, since one cannot live withoutengagement. Without Krsna consciousness, one must be always seekingself-centered or extended selfish activities. But a Krsna consciousperson can do everything for the satisfaction of Krsna and thereby beperfectly detached from sense gratification. One who has no suchrealization must mechanically try to escape material desires beforebeing elevated to the top rung of the yoga ladder.
TEXT 5
uddhared atmanatmanam
natmanam avasadayetatmaiva hy atmano bandhuratmaiva ripur atmanah
SYNONYMSuddharet--one must deliver; atmana--by the mind; atmanam--the
conditioned soul; na--never; atmanam--the conditioned soul; avasadayet--put into degradation; atma--mind; eva--certainly; hi--indeed; atmanah--of the conditioned soul; bandhuh--friend; atma--mind; eva--certainly;ripuh--enemy; atmanah--of the conditioned soul.
TRANSLATION
A man must elevate himself by his own mind, not degrade himself. The
mind is the friend of the conditioned soul, and his enemy as well.
PURPORTThe word atma denotes body, mind and soul--depending upon different
circumstances. In the yoga system, the mind and the conditioned soulare especially important. Since the mind is the central point of yogapractice, atma refers here to the mind. The purpose of the yoga systemis to control the mind and to draw it away from attachment to senseobjects. It is stressed herein that the mind must be so trained that itcan deliver the conditioned soul from the mire of nescience. Inmaterial existence one is subjected to the influence of the mind andthe senses. In fact, the pure soul is entangled in the material worldbecause of the mind's ego which desires to lord it over materialnature. Therefore, the mind should be trained so that it will not beattracted by the glitter of material nature, and in this way theconditioned soul may be saved. One should not degrade oneself byattraction to sense objects. The more one is attracted by senseobjects, the more one becomes entangled in material existence. The bestway to disentangle oneself is to always engage the mind in Krsnaconsciousness. The word hi is used for emphasizing this point, i.e.,that one must do this. It is also said:
mana eva manusyanam
karanam bandha-moksayohbandhaya visayasangomuktyai nirvisayam manah
"For man, mind is the cause of bondage and mind is the cause of
liberation. Mind absorbed in sense objects is the cause of bondage, andmind detached from the sense objects is the cause of liberation."(Amrta-bindu Upanisad 2) Therefore, the mind which is always engaged inKrsna consciousness is the cause of supreme liberation.
TEXT 6
bandhur atmatmanas tasya
yenatmaivatmana jitahanatmanas tu satrutvevartetatmaiva satru-vat
SYNONYMSbandhuh--friend; atma--mind; atmanah--of the living entity; tasya--of
him; yena--by whom; atma--mind; eva--certainly; atmana--by the livingentity; jitah--conquered; anatmanah--of one who has failed to controlthe mind; tu--but; satrutve--because of enmity; varteta--remains; atmaeva--the very mind; satru-vat--as an enemy.
TRANSLATIONFor him who has conquered the mind, the mind is the best of friends;
but for one who has failed to do so, his very mind will be the greatestenemy.
PURPORT
The purpose of practicing eightfold yoga is to control the mind in
order to make it a friend in discharging the human mission. Unless themind is controlled, the practice of yoga (for show) is simply a wasteof time. One who cannot control his mind lives always with the greatestenemy, and thus his life and its mission are spoiled. Theconstitutional position of the living entity is to carry out the orderof the superior. As long as one's mind remains an unconquered enemy,one has to serve the dictations of lust, anger, avarice, illusion, etc.But when the mind is conquered, one voluntarily agrees to abide by thedictation of the Personality of Godhead, who is situated within theheart of everyone as Paramatma. Real yoga practice entails meeting theParamatma within the heart and then following His dictation. For onewho takes to Krsna consciousness directly, perfect surrender to thedictation of the Lord follows automatically.
TEXT 7
jitatmanah prasantasya
paramatma samahitahsitosna-sukha-duhkhesutatha manapamanayoh
SYNONYMSjita-atmanah--of one who has conquered his mind; prasantasya--of who
has attained tranquillity by such control over the mind; parama-atma--the Supersoul; samahitah--approached completely; sita--cold; usna--heat; sukha--in happiness; duhkhesu--in distress; tatha--also; mana--honor; apamanayoh--and dishonor.
TRANSLATIONFor one who has conquered the mind, the Supersoul is already reached,
for he has attained tranquillity. To such a man happiness and distress,heat and cold, honor and dishonor are all the same.
PURPORTActually, every living entity is intended to abide by the dictation of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is seated in everyone's heartas Paramatma. When the mind is misled by the external illusory energy,one becomes entangled in material activities. Therefore, as soon asone's mind is controlled through one of the yoga systems, one is to beconsidered as having already reached the destination. One has to abideby superior dictation. When one's mind is fixed on the superior nature,he has no other alternative but to follow the dictation of the Supreme.The mind must admit some superior dictation and follow it. The effectof controlling the mind is that one automatically follows the dictationof the Paramatma or Supersoul. Because this transcendental position isat once achieved by one who is in Krsna consciousness, the devotee ofthe Lord is unaffected by the dualities of material existence, namelydistress and happiness, cold and heat, etc. This state is practicalsamadhi, or absorption in the Supreme.
TEXT 8
jnana-vijnana-trptatma
kuta-stho vijitendriyah
yukta ity ucyate yogi
sama-lostrasma-kancanah
SYNONYMSjnana--acquired knowledge; vijnana--realized knowledge; trpta--
satisfied; atma--living entity; kuta-sthah--spiritually situated;vijita-indriyah--sensually controlled; yuktah--competent for self-realization; iti--thus; ucyate--is said; yogi--the mystic; sama--equipoised; lostra--pebbles; asma--stone; kancanah--gold.
TRANSLATIONA person is said to be established in self-realization and is called a
yogi [or mystic] when he is fully satisfied by virtue of acquiredknowledge and realization. Such a person is situated in transcendenceand is self-controlled. He sees everything--whether it be pebbles,stones or gold--as the same.
PURPORTBook knowledge without realization of the Supreme Truth is useless.
This is stated as follows:
atah sri-krsna-namadi
na bhaved grahyam indriyaihsevonmukhe hi jihvadausvayam eva sphuraty adah
"No one can understand the transcendental nature of the name, form,
quality and pastimes of Sri Krsna through his materially contaminatedsenses. Only when one becomes spiritually saturated by transcendentalservice to the Lord are the transcendental name, form, quality andpastimes of the Lord revealed to him." (Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 1.2.234)This Bhagavad-gita is the science of Krsna consciousness. No one canbecome Krsna conscious simply by mundane scholarship. One must befortunate enough to associate with a person who is in pureconsciousness. A Krsna conscious person has realized knowledge, by thegrace of Krsna, because he is satisfied with pure devotional service.By realized knowledge, one becomes perfect. By transcendental knowledgeone can remain steady in his convictions, but by mere academicknowledge one can be easily deluded and confused by apparentcontradictions. It is the realized soul who is actually self-controlledbecause he is surrendered to Krsna. He is transcendental because he hasnothing to do with mundane scholarship. For him mundane scholarship andmental speculation, which may be as good as gold to others, are of nogreater value than pebbles or stones.
TEXT 9
suhrn-mitrary-udasina-
madhyastha-dvesya-bandhususadhusv api ca papesusama-buddhir visisyate
SYNONYMS
su-hrt--by nature a well-wisher; mitra--benefactor with affection; ari-
-enemy; udasina--neutral between belligerents; madhya-stha--mediatorbetween the belligerents; dvesya--envious; bandhusu--among relatives orwell-wishers; sadhusu--unto the pious; api--as well as; ca--and;papesu--unto the sinners; sama-buddhih--having equal intelligence;visisyate--is far advanced.
TRANSLATIONA person is said to be still further advanced when he regards all--the
honest well-wisher, friends and enemies, the envious, the pious, thesinner and those who are indifferent and impartial--with an equal mind.
TEXT 10
yogi yunjita satatam
atmanam rahasi sthitahekaki yata-cittatmanirasir aparigrahah
SYNONYMSyogi--a transcendentalist; yunjita--must concentrate in Krsna
consciousness; satatam--constantly; atmanam--himself (by the body, mindand self); rahasi--in a secluded place; sthitah--being so situated;ekaki--alone; yata-citta-atma--always careful in mind; nirasih--withoutbeing attracted by anything else; aparigrahah--free from the feeling ofpossessiveness.
TRANSLATIONA transcendentalist should always try to concentrate his mind on the
Supreme Self; he should live alone in a secluded place and shouldalways carefully control his mind. He should be free from desires andfeelings of possessiveness.
PURPORTKrsna is realized in different degrees as Brahman, Paramatma and the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Krsna consciousness means, concisely,to be always engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord.But those who are attached to the impersonal Brahman or the localizedSupersoul are also partially Krsna conscious, because impersonalBrahman is the spiritual ray of Krsna and Supersoul is the all-pervading partial expansion of Krsna. Thus the impersonalist and themeditator are also indirectly Krsna conscious. A directly Krsnaconscious person is the topmost transcendentalist because such adevotee knows what is meant by Brahman or Paramatma. His knowledge ofthe Absolute Truth is perfect, whereas the impersonalist and themeditative yogi are imperfectly Krsna conscious.Nevertheless, all of these are instructed herewith to be constantlyengaged in their particular pursuits so that they may come to thehighest perfection sooner or later. The first business of atranscendentalist is to keep the mind always on Krsna. One shouldalways think of Krsna and not forget Him even for a moment.Concentration of the mind on the Supreme is called samadhi, or trance.In order to concentrate the mind, one should always remain in seclusionand avoid disturbance by external objects. He should be very careful to
accept favorable and reject unfavorable conditions that affect his
realization. And, in perfect determination, he should not hanker afterunnecessary material things that entangle him by feelings ofpossessiveness.All these perfections and precautions are perfectly executed when oneis directly in Krsna consciousness, because direct Krsna consciousnessmeans self-abnegation, wherein there is very little chance for materialpossessiveness. Srila Rupa Gosvami characterizes Krsna consciousness inthis way:
anasaktasya visayan
yatharham upayunjatahnirbandhah krsna-sambandheyuktam vairagyam ucyate
prapancikataya buddhya
hari-sambandhi-vastunahmumuksubhih parityagovairagyam phalgu kathyate
"When one is not attached to anything, but at the same time accepts
everything in relation to Krsna, one is rightly situated abovepossessiveness. On the other hand, one who rejects everything withoutknowledge of its relationship to Krsna is not as complete in hisrenunciation." (Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 2.255-256)A Krsna conscious person well knows that everything belongs to Krsna,and thus he is always free from feelings of personal possession. Assuch, he has no hankering for anything on his own personal account. Heknows how to accept things in favor of Krsna consciousness and how toreject things unfavorable to Krsna consciousness. He is always alooffrom material things because he is always transcendental, and he isalways alone, having nothing to do with persons not in Krsnaconsciousness. Therefore a person in Krsna consciousness is the perfectyogi.
TEXTS 11-12
sucau dese pratisthapya
sthiram asanam atmanahnaty-ucchritam nati-nicamcailajina-kusottaram
tatraikagram manah krtva
yata-cittendriya-kriyahupavisyasane yunjyadyogam atma-visuddhaye
SYNONYMSsucau--in a sanctified; dese--in the land; pratisthapya--placing;
sthiram--firm; asanam--seat; atmanah--self-dependent; na--not; ati--too; ucchritam--high; na--nor; ati--too; nicam--low; caila-ajina--softcloth and deerskin; kusottaram--kusa grass; tatra--thereupon; eka-agram--one attention; manah--mind; krtva--doing so; yata-citta--controlling the mind; indriya--senses; kriyah--activities; upavisya--sitting on; asane--on the seat; yunjyat--execute; yogam--yoga practice;atma--heart; visuddhaye--for clarifying.
TRANSLATION
To practice yoga, one should go to a secluded place and should lay kusa
grass on the ground and then cover it with a deerskin and a soft cloth.The seat should neither be too high nor too low and should be situatedin a sacred place. The yogi should then sit on it very firmly andshould practice yoga by controlling the mind and the senses, purifyingthe heart and fixing the mind on one point.
PURPORT"Sacred place" refers to places of pilgrimage. In India the yogis, the
transcendentalists or the devotees all leave home and reside in sacredplaces such as Prayaga, Mathura, Vrndavana, Hrsikesa and Hardwar and insolitude practice yoga where the sacred rivers like the Yamuna and theGanges flow. But often this is not possible, especially for Westerners.The so-called yoga societies in big cities may be successful in earningmaterial benefit, but they are not at all suitable for the actualpractice of yoga. One who is not self-controlled and whose mind is notundisturbed cannot practice meditation. Therefore, in the Brhan-naradiya Purana it is said that in the Kali-yuga (the present yuga, orage) when people in general are short-lived, slow in spiritualrealization and always disturbed by various anxieties, the best meansof spiritual realization is chanting the holy name of the Lord.
harer nama harer nama
harer namaiva kevalamkalau nasty eva nasty evanasty eva gatir anyatha
"In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance is
chanting the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is noother way. There is no other way."
TEXTS 13-14
samam kaya-siro-grivam
dharayann acalam sthirahsampreksya nasikagram svamdisas canavalokayan
prasantatma vigata-bhir
brahmacari-vrate sthitahmanah samyamya mac-cittoyukta asita mat-parah
SYNONYMSsamam--straight; kaya-sirah--body and head; grivam--neck; dharayan--
holding; acalam--unmoved; sthirah--still; sampreksya--looking; nasika--nose; agram--tip; svam--own; disah--all sides; ca--also; anavalokayan--not seeing; prasanta--unagitated; atma--mind; vigata-bhih--devoid offear; brahmacari-vrate--in the vow of celibacy; sthitah--situated;manah--mind; samyamya--completely subduing; mat--upon Me (Krsna);cittah--concentrated; yuktah--the actual yogi; asita--being so; mat--unto Me; parah--the ultimate goal.
TRANSLATION
One should hold one's body, neck and head erect in a straight line and
stare steadily at the tip of the nose. Thus, with an unagitated,subdued mind, devoid of fear, completely free from sex life, one shouldmeditate upon Me within the heart and make Me the ultimate goal oflife.
PURPORTThe goal of life is to know Krsna, who is situated within the heart of
every living being as Paramatma, the four-handed Visnu form. The yogaprocess is practiced in order to discover and see this localized formof Visnu, and not for any other purpose. The localized visnu-murti isthe plenary representation of Krsna dwelling within one's heart. Onewho has no program to realize this visnu-murti is uselessly engaged inmock-yoga practice and is certainly wasting his time. Krsna is theultimate goal of life, and the visnu-murti situated in one's heart isthe object of yoga practice. To realize this visnu-murti within theheart, one has to observe complete abstinence from sex life; thereforeone has to leave home and live alone in a secluded place, remainingseated as mentioned above. One cannot enjoy sex life daily at home orelsewhere and attend a so-called yoga class and thus become a yogi. Onehas to practice controlling the mind and avoiding all kinds of sensegratification, of which sex life is the chief. In the rules of celibacywritten by the great sage Yajnavalkya it is said:
karmana manasa vaca
sarvavasthasu sarvadasarvatra maithuna-tyagobrahmacaryam pracaksate
"The vow of brahmacarya is meant to help one completely abstain from
sex indulgence in work, words and mind--at all times, under allcircumstances, and in all places." No one can perform correct yogapractice through sex indulgence. Brahmacarya is taught, therefore, fromchildhood when one has no knowledge of sex life. Children at the age offive are sent to the guru-kula, or the place of the spiritual master,and the master trains the young boys in the strict discipline ofbecoming brahmacaris. Without such practice, no one can makeadvancement in any yoga, whether it be dhyana, jnana or bhakti. Onewho, however, follows the rules and regulations of married life, havinga sexual relationship only with his wife (and that also underregulation), is also called brahmacari. Such a restrained householderbrahmacari may be accepted in the bhakti school, but the jnana anddhyana schools do not even admit householder brahmacaris. They requirecomplete abstinence without compromise. In the bhakti school, ahouseholder brahmacari is allowed controlled sex life because the cultof bhakti-yoga is so powerful that one automatically loses sexualattraction, being engaged in the superior service of the Lord. In theBhagavad-gita (2.59) it is said:
visaya vinivartante
niraharasya dehinahrasa-varjam raso 'py asyaparam drstva nivartate
Whereas others are forced to restrain themselves from sense
gratification, a devotee of the Lord automatically refrains because of
superior taste. Other than the devotee, no one has any information of
that superior taste.Vigata-bhih. One cannot be fearless unless one is fully in Krsnaconsciousness. A conditioned soul is fearful due to his pervertedmemory, his forgetfulness of his eternal relationship with Krsna. TheBhagavatam (11.2.37) says, bhayam dvitiyabhinivesatah syad isadapetasya viparyayo 'smrtih. Krsna consciousness is the only basis forfearlessness. Therefore, perfect practice is possible for a person whois Krsna conscious. And since the ultimate goal of yoga practice is tosee the Lord within, a Krsna conscious person is already the best ofall yogis. The principles of the yoga system mentioned herein aredifferent from those of the popular so-called yoga societies.
TEXT 15
yunjann evam sadatmanam
yogi niyata-manasahsantim nirvana-paramammat-samstham adhigacchati
SYNONYMSyunjan--practicing like this; evam--as mentioned above; sada--
constantly; atmanam--body, mind and soul; yogi--the mystictranscendentalist; niyata-manasah--regulated mind; santim--peace;nirvana-paramam--cessation of material existence; mat-samstham--in thespiritual sky (the kingdom of God); adhigacchati--does attain.
TRANSLATIONThus practicing control of the body, mind and activities, the mystic
transcendentalist attains to the kingdom of God [or the abode of Krsna]by cessation of material existence.
PURPORTThe ultimate goal in practicing yoga is now clearly explained. Yoga
practice is not meant for attaining any kind of material facility; itis to enable the cessation of all material existence. One who seeks animprovement in health or aspires after material perfection is no yogiaccording to Bhagavad-gita. Nor does cessation of material existenceentail one's entering into "the void," which is only a myth. There isno void anywhere within the creation of the Lord. Rather, the cessationof material existence enables one to enter into the spiritual sky, theabode of the Lord. The abode of the Lord is also clearly described inthe Bhagavad-gita as that place where there is no need of sun, moon orelectricity. All the planets in the spiritual kingdom are self-illuminated like the sun in the material sky. The kingdom of God iseverywhere, but the spiritual sky and the planets thereof are calledparam dhama, or superior abodes.A consummate yogi, who is perfect in understanding Lord Krsna, as isclearly stated herein (mat-cittah, mat-parah, mat-sthanam) by the LordHimself, can attain real peace and can ultimately reach His supremeabode, the Krsnaloka, known as Goloka Vrndavana. In the Brahma-samhita(5.37) it is clearly stated, (goloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhutah)that the Lord, although residing always in His abode called Goloka, isthe all-pervading Brahman and the localized Paramatma as well by dintof His superior spiritual energies. No one can reach the spiritual sky
(Vaikuntha) or enter into the Lord's eternal abode (Goloka Vrndavana)
without the proper understanding of Krsna and His plenary expansionVisnu. Therefore a person working in Krsna consciousness is the perfectyogi, because his mind is always absorbed in Krsna's activities (sa vaimanah krsna-padaravindayoh). In the Vedas also (Svetasvatara Upanisad3.8) we learn, tam eva viditvati mrtyum eti: "One can overcome the pathof birth and death only by understanding the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, Krsna." In other words, perfection of the yoga system is theattainment of freedom from material existence and not some magicaljugglery or gymnastic feats to befool innocent people.
TEXT 16
naty-asnatas 'tu yogo 'sti
na caikantam anasnatahna cati-svapna-silasyajagrato naiva carjuna
SYNONYMSna--never; ati--too much; asnatah--of one who eats so; tu--but; yogah--
linking with the Supreme; asti--there is; na--nor; ca--also; ekantam--very low; anasnatah--abstaining from eating; na--nor; ca--also; ati--too much; svapna-silasya--of one who sleeps too much; jagratah--or onewho keeps night watch too much; na--not; eva--ever; ca--and; arjuna--OArjuna.
TRANSLATIONThere is no possibility of one's becoming a yogi, O Arjuna, if one eats
too much, or eats too little, sleeps too much or does not sleep enough.
PURPORTRegulation of diet and sleep is recommended herein for the yogis. Too
much eating means eating more than is required to keep the body andsoul together. There is no need for men to eat animals, because thereis an ample supply of grains, vegetables, fruits and milk. Such simplefoodstuff is considered to be in the mode of goodness according to theBhagavad-gita. Animal food is for those in the mode of ignorance.Therefore, those who indulge in animal food, drinking, smoking andeating food which is not first offered to Krsna will suffer sinfulreactions because of eating only polluted things. Bhunjate te tv aghampapa ye pacanty atma-karanat. Anyone who eats for sense pleasure, orcooks for himself, not offering his food to Krsna, eats only sin. Onewho eats sin and eats more than is allotted to him cannot executeperfect yoga. It is best that one eat only the remnants of foodstuffoffered to Krsna. A person in Krsna consciousness does not eat anythingwhich is not first offered to Krsna. Therefore, only the Krsnaconscious person can attain perfection in yoga practice. Nor can onewho artificially abstains from eating, manufacturing his own personalprocess of fasting, practice yoga. The Krsna conscious person observesfasting as it is recommended in the scriptures. He does not fast or eatmore than is required, and he is thus competent to perform yogapractice. One who eats more than required will dream very much whilesleeping, and he must consequently sleep more than is required. Oneshould not sleep more than six hours daily. One who sleeps more thansix hours out of twenty-four is certainly influenced by the mode of
ignorance. A person in the mode of ignorance is lazy and prone to sleep
a great deal. Such a person cannot perform yoga.
TEXT 17
yuktahara-viharasya
yukta-cestasya karmasuyukta-svapnavabodhasyayogo bhavati duhkha-ha
SYNONYMSyukta--regulated; ahara--eating; viharasya--recreation; yukta--
regulated; cestasya--of one who works for maintenance; karmasu--indischarging duties; yukta--regulated; svapna-avabodhasya--regulatedsleep and wakefulness; yogah--practice of yoga; bhavati--becomes;duhkha-ha--diminishing pains.
TRANSLATIONHe who is temperate in his habits of eating, sleeping, working and
recreation can mitigate all material pains by practicing the yogasystem.
PURPORTExtravagance in the matter of eating, sleeping, defending and mating--
which are demands of the body--can block advancement in the practice ofyoga. As far as eating is concerned, it can be regulated only when oneis practiced to take and accept prasadam, sanctified food. Lord Krsnais offered, according to the Bhagavad-gita (9.26), vegetables, flowers,fruits, grains, milk, etc. In this way, a person in Krsna consciousnessbecomes automatically trained not to accept food not meant for humanconsumption, or which not in the category of goodness. As far assleeping is concerned, a Krsna conscious person is always alert in thedischarge of his duties in Krsna consciousness, and therefore anyunnecessary time spent sleeping is considered a great loss. Avyartha-kalatvam: a Krsna conscious person cannot bear to pass a minute of hislife without being engaged in the service of the Lord. Therefore, hissleeping is kept to a minimum. His ideal in this respect is Srila RupaGosvami, who was always engaged in the service of Krsna and who couldnot sleep more than two hours a day, and sometimes not even that.Thakura Haridasa would not even accept prasadam nor even sleep for amoment without finishing his daily routine of chanting with his beadsthree hundred thousand names. As far as work is concerned, a Krsnaconscious person does not do anything which is not connected withKrsna's interest, and thus his work is always regulated and isuntainted by sense gratification. Since there is no question of sensegratification, there is no material leisure for a person in Krsnaconsciousness. And because he is regulated in all his work, speech,sleep, wakefulness and all other bodily activities, there is nomaterial misery for him.
TEXT 18
yada viniyatam cittam
atmany evavatisthatenisprhah sarva-kamebhyo
yukta ity ucyate tada
SYNONYMSyada--when; viniyatam--particularly disciplined; cittam--the mind and
its activities; atmani--in the transcendence; eva--certainly;avatisthate--becomes situated; nisprhah--devoid of desire; sarva--allkinds of; kamebhyah--material desires; yuktah--well situated in yoga;iti--thus; ucyate--is said to be; tada--at that time.
TRANSLATIONWhen the yogi, by practice of yoga, disciplines his mental activities
and becomes situated in transcendence--devoid of all material desires--he is said to have attained yoga.
PURPORTThe activities of the yogi are distinguished from those of an ordinary
person by his characteristic cessation from all kinds of materialdesires--of which sex is the chief. A perfect yogi is so welldisciplined in the activities of the mind that he can no longer bedisturbed by any kind of material desire. This perfectional stage canautomatically be attained by persons in Krsna consciousness, as statedin the Srimad-Bhagavatam (9.4.18-20):
sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayor
vacamsi vaikuntha-gunanuvarnanekarau harer mandira-marjanadisusrutim cakaracyuta-sat-kathodaye
mukunda-lingalaya-darsane drsau
tad-bhrtya-gatra-sparse 'nga-sangamamghranam ca tat-pada-saroja-saurabhesrimat-tulasya rasanam tad-arpite
padau hareh ksetra-padanusarpane
siro hrsikesa-padabhivandanekamam ca dasye na tu kama-kamyayayathottama-sloka-janasraya ratih
"King Ambarisa first of all engaged his mind on the lotus feet of Lord
Krsna; then, one after another, he engaged his words in describing thetranscendental qualities of the Lord, his hands in mopping the templeof the Lord, his ears in hearing of the activities of the Lord, hiseyes in seeing the transcendental forms of the Lord, his body intouching the bodies of the devotees, his sense of smell in smelling thescents of the lotus flower offered to the Lord, his tongue in tastingthe tulasi leaf offered at the lotus feet of the Lord, his legs ingoing to places of pilgrimage and the temple of the Lord, his head inoffering obeisances unto the Lord and his desires in executing themission of the Lord. All these transcendental activities are quitebefitting a pure devotee."This transcendental stage may be inexpressible subjectively by thefollowers of the impersonalist path, but it becomes very easy andpractical for a person in Krsna consciousness, as is apparent in theabove description of the engagements of Maharaja Ambarisa. Unless themind is fixed on the lotus feet of the Lord by constant remembrance,
such transcendental engagements are not practical. In the devotional
service of the Lord, therefore, these prescribed activities are calledarcana, or engaging all the senses in the service of the Lord. Thesenses and the mind require engagements. Simple abnegation is notpractical. Therefore, for people in general--especially those who arenot in the renounced order of life--transcendental engagement of thesenses and the mind as described above is the perfect process fortranscendental achievement, which is called yukta in the Bhagavad-gita.
TEXT 19
yatha dipo nivata-stho
nengate sopama smrtayogino yata-cittasyayunjato yogam atmanah
SYNONYMSyatha--as; dipah--a lamp; nivata-sthah--in a place without wind; na--
does not; ingate--waver; sa upama--compared to that; smrta--likened;yoginah--of the yogi; yata-cittasya--whose mind is controlled;yunjatah--constantly engaged in; yogam--meditation; atmanah--ontranscendence.
TRANSLATIONAs a lamp in a windless place does not waver, so the transcendentalist,
whose mind is controlled, remains always steady in his meditation onthe transcendent self.
PURPORTA truly Krsna conscious person, always absorbed in transcendence, in
constant undisturbed meditation on his worshipable Lord, is as steadyas a lamp in a windless place.
TEXTS 20-23
yatroparamate cittam
niruddham yoga-sevayayatra caivatmanatmanampasyann atmani tusyati
sukham atyantikam yat tad
buddhi-grahyam atindriyamvetti yatra na caivayamsthitas calati tattvatah
yam labdhva caparam labham
manyate nadhikam tatahyasmin sthito na duhkhenagurunapi vicalyate
tam vidyad duhkha-samyoga-
viyogam yoga-samjnitam
SYNONYMS
yatra--in that state of affairs; uparamate--when one feels
transcendental happiness; cittam--mental activities; niruddham--restrained from matter; yoga-sevaya--by performance of yoga; yatra--inthat; ca--also; eva--certainly; atmana--by the pure mind; atmanam--theself; pasyan--realizing the position; atmani--in the self; tusyati--becomes satisfied; sukham--happiness; atyantikam--supreme; yat--inwhich; tat--that; buddhi--intelligence; grahyam--accessible;atindriyam--transcendental; vetti--knows; yatra--wherein; na--never;ca--also; eva--certainly; ayam--in this; sthitah--situated; calati--moves; tattvatah--from the truth; yam--that which; labdhva--byattainment; ca--also; aparam--any other; labham--gain; manyate--doesnot mind; na--never; adhikam--more than that; tatah--from that; yasmin--in which; sthitah--being situated; na--never; duhkhena--by miseries;guruna api--even though very difficult; vicalyate--becomes shaken; tam--that; vidyat--you must know; duhkha-samyoga--miseries of materialcontact; viyogam--extermination; yoga-samjnitam--trance in yoga.
TRANSLATIONThe stage of perfection is called trance, or samadhi, when one's mind
is completely restrained from material mental activities by practice ofyoga. This is characterized by one's ability to see the self by thepure mind and to relish and rejoice in the self. In that joyous state,one is situated in boundless transcendental happiness and enjoyshimself through transcendental senses. Established thus, one neverdeparts from the truth and upon gaining this he thinks there is nogreater gain. Being situated in such a position, one is never shaken,even in the midst of greatest difficulty. This indeed is actual freedomfrom all miseries arising from material contact.
PURPORTBy practice of yoga one becomes gradually detached from material
concepts. This is the primary characteristic of the yoga principle. Andafter this, one becomes situated in trance, or samadhi, which meansthat the yogi realizes the Supersoul through transcendental mind andintelligence, without any of the misgivings of identifying the selfwith the Superself. Yoga practice is more or less based on theprinciples of the Patanjali system. Some unauthorized commentators tryto identify the individual soul with the Supersoul, and the moniststhink this to be liberation, but they do not understand the realpurpose of the Patanjali system of yoga. There is an acceptance oftranscendental pleasure in the Patanjali system, but the monists do notaccept this transcendental pleasure, out of fear of jeopardizing thetheory of oneness. The duality of knowledge and knower is not acceptedby the nondualist, but in this verse transcendental pleasure--realizedthrough transcendental senses--is accepted. And this is corroborated byPatanjali Muni, the famous exponent of the yoga system. The great sagedeclares in his Yoga-sutras (3.34): purusartha-sunyanam gunanampratiprasavah kaivalyam svarupa-pratistha va citi-saktir iti.This citi-sakti, or internal potency, is transcendental. Purusarthameans material religiosity, economic development, sense gratificationand, at the end, the attempt to become one with the Supreme. This"oneness with the Supreme" is called kaivalyam by the monist. Butaccording to Patanjali, this kaivalyam is an internal, ortranscendental, potency by which the living entity becomes aware of hisconstitutional position. In the words of Lord Caitanya, this state ofaffairs is called ceto-darpana-marjanam, or clearance of the impure
mirror of the mind. This "clearance" is actually liberation, or bhava-
maha-davagni-nirvapanam. The theory of nirvana--also preliminary--corresponds with this principle. In the Bhagavatam (2.10.6) this iscalled svarupena vyavasthitih. The Bhagavad-gita also confirms thissituation in this verse.After nirvana, or material cessation, there is the manifestation ofspiritual activities, or devotional service to the Lord, known as Krsnaconsciousness. In the words of the Bhagavatam, svarupena vyavasthitih:this is the "real life of the living entity." Maya, or illusion, is thecondition of spiritual life contaminated by material infection.Liberation from this material infection does not mean destruction ofthe original eternal position of the living entity. Patanjali alsoaccepts this by his words kaivalyam svarupa-pratistha va citi-saktiriti. This citi-sakti, or transcendental pleasure, is real life. This isconfirmed in the Vedanta-sutra (1.1.12) as ananda-mayo 'bhyasat. Thisnatural transcendental pleasure is the ultimate goal of yoga and iseasily achieved by execution of devotional service, or bhakti-yoga.Bhakti-yoga will be vividly described in the Seventh Chapter ofBhagavad-gita.In the yoga system, as described in this chapter, there are two kindsof samadhi, called samprajnata-samadhi and asamprajnata-samadhi. Whenone becomes situated in the transcendental position by variousphilosophical researches, it is called samprajnata-samadhi. In theasamprajnata-samadhi there is no longer any connection with mundanepleasure, for one is then transcendental to all sorts of happinessderived from the senses. When the yogi is once situated in thattranscendental position, he is never shaken from it. Unless the yogi isable to reach this position, he is unsuccessful. Today's so-called yogapractice, which involves various sense pleasures, is contradictory. Ayogi indulging in sex and intoxication is a mockery. Even those yogiswho are attracted by the siddhis (perfections) in the process of yogaare not perfectly situated. If the yogis are attracted by the by-products of yoga, then they cannot attain the stage of perfection, asis stated in this verse. Persons, therefore, indulging in the make-showpractice of gymnastic feats or siddhis should know that the aim of yogais lost in that way.The best practice of yoga in this age is Krsna consciousness, which isnot baffling. A Krsna conscious person is so happy in his occupationthat he does not aspire after any other happiness. There are manyimpediments especially in this age of hypocrisy, to practicing hatha-yoga, dhyana-yoga and jnana-yoga, but there is no such problem inexecuting karma-yoga or bhakti-yoga.As long as the material body exists, one has to meet the demands of thebody, namely eating, sleeping, defending and mating. But a person whois in pure bhakti-yoga or in Krsna consciousness does not arouse thesenses while meeting the demands of the body. Rather, he accepts thebare necessities of life, making the best use of a bad bargain, andenjoys transcendental happiness in Krsna consciousness. He is calloustoward incidental occurrences--such as accidents, disease, scarcity andeven the death of a most dear relative--but he is always alert toexecute his duties in Krsna consciousness or bhakti-yoga. Accidentsnever deviate him from his duty. As stated in the Bhagavad-gita (2.14),agamapayino 'nityas tams titiksasva bharata. He endures all suchincidental occurrences because he knows that they come and go and donot affect his duties. In this way he achieves the highest perfectionin yoga practice.
TEXT 24
sa niscayena yoktavyo
yogo 'nirvinna-cetasasankalpa-prabhavan kamamstyaktva sarvan asesatahmanasaivendriya-gramamviniyamya samantatah
SYNONYMSsah--that yoga system; niscayena--with firm determination; yoktavyah--
must be practiced; yogah--in such practice; anirvinna-cetasa--withoutdeviation; sankalpa--material desires; prabhavan--born of; kaman--sensegratification; tyaktva--giving up; sarvan--all; asesatah--completely;manasa--by the mind; eva--certainly; indriya-gramam--the full set ofsenses; viniyamya--regulating; samantatah--from all sides.
TRANSLATIONOne should engage oneself in the practice of yoga with undeviating
determination and faith. One should abandon, without exception, allmaterial desires born of false ego and thus control all the senses onall sides by the mind.
PURPORTThe yoga practitioner should be determined and should patiently
prosecute the practice without deviation. One should be sure of successat the end and pursue this course with great perseverance, not becomingdiscouraged if there is any delay in the attainment of success. Successis sure for the rigid practitioner. Regarding bhakti-yoga, Rupa Gosvamisays:
utsahan niscayad dhairyat
tat-tat-karma-pravartanatsanga-tyagat sato vrttehsadbhir bhaktih prasidhyati
"The process of bhakti-yoga can be executed successfully with full-
hearted enthusiasm, perseverance, and determination by following theprescribed duties in the association of devotees and by engagingcompletely in activities of goodness." (Upadesamrta 3)As for determination, one should follow the example of the sparrow wholost her eggs in the waves of the ocean. A sparrow laid her eggs on theshore of the ocean, but the big ocean carried away the eggs on itswaves. The sparrow became very upset and asked the ocean to return hereggs. The ocean did not even consider her appeal. So the sparrowdecided to dry up the ocean. She began to pick out the water in hersmall beak, and everyone laughed at her for her impossibledetermination. The news of her activity spread, and at last Garuda, thegigantic bird carrier of Lord Visnu, heard it. He became compassionatetoward his small sister bird, and so he came to see the sparrow. Garudawas very pleased by the determination of the small sparrow, and hepromised to help. Thus Garuda at once asked the ocean to return hereggs lest he himself take up the work of the sparrow. The ocean wasfrightened at this, and returned the eggs. Thus the sparrow becamehappy by the grace of Garuda.
Similarly, the practice of yoga, especially bhakti-yoga in Krsna
consciousness, may appear to be a very difficult job. But if anyonefollows the principles with great determination, the Lord will surelyhelp, for God helps those who help themselves.
TEXT 25
sanaih sanair uparamed
buddhya dhrti-grhitayaatma-samstham manah krtvana kincid api cintayet
SYNONYMSsanaih--gradually; sanaih--step by step; uparamet--hesitated; buddhya--
by intelligence; dhrti-grhitaya--carrying the conviction; atma-samstham--placed in transcendence; manah--mind; krtva--doing so; na--not; kincit--anything else; api--even; cintayet--be thinking of.
TRANSLATIONGradually, step by step, with full conviction, one should become
situated in trance by means of intelligence, and thus the mind shouldbe fixed on the self alone and should think of nothing else.
PURPORTBy proper conviction and intelligence one should gradually cease sense
activities. This is called pratyahara. The mind, being controlled byconviction, meditation, and cessation of the senses, should be situatedin trance, or samadhi. At that time there is no longer any danger ofbecoming engaged in the material conception of life. In other words,although one is involved with matter as long as the material bodyexists, one should not think about sense gratification. One shouldthink of no pleasure aside from the pleasure of the Supreme Self. Thisstate is easily attained by directly practicing Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 26
yato yato niscalati
manas cancalam asthiramtatas tato niyamyaitadatmany eva vasam nayet
SYNONYMSyatah--whatever; yatah--wherever; niscalati--verily agitated; manah--
the mind; cancalam--flickering; asthiram--unsteady; tatah--from there;tatah--and thereafter; niyamya--regulating; etat--this; atmani--in theself; eva--certainly; vasam--control; nayet--must bring in.
TRANSLATIONFrom whatever and wherever the mind wanders due to its flickering and
unsteady nature, one must certainly withdraw it and bring it back underthe control of the self.
PURPORT
The nature of the mind is flickering and unsteady. But a self-realized
yogi has to control the mind; the mind should not control him. One whocontrols the mind (and therefore the senses as well) is called gosvami,or svami, and one who is controlled by the mind is called go-dasa, orthe servant of the senses. A gosvami knows the standard of sensehappiness. In transcendental sense happiness, the senses are engaged inthe service of Hrsikesa, or the supreme owner of the senses--Krsna.Serving Krsna with purified senses is called Krsna consciousness. Thatis the way of bringing the senses under full control. What is more,that is the highest perfection of yoga practice.
TEXT 27
prasanta-manasam hy enam
yoginam sukham uttamamupaiti santa-rajasambrahma-bhutam akalmasam
SYNONYMSprasanta--mind fixed on the lotus feet of Krsna; manasam--of one whose
mind is so fixed; hi--certainly; enam--this; yoginam--the yogi; sukham--happiness; uttamam--the highest; upaiti--attains; santa-rajasam--pacified passion; brahma-bhutam--liberation by identification with theAbsolute; akalmasam--freed from all past sinful reaction.
TRANSLATIONThe yogi whose mind is fixed on Me verily attains the highest
happiness. By virtue of his identity with Brahman, he is liberated; hismind is peaceful, his passions are quieted, and he is freed from sin.
PURPORTBrahma-bhuta is the state of being free from material contamination and
situated in the transcendental service of the Lord. Mad-bhaktim labhateparam (Bg. 18.54). One cannot remain in the quality of Brahman, theAbsolute, until one's mind is fixed on the lotus feet of the Lord. Savai manah krsna-padaravindayoh. To be always engaged in thetranscendental loving service of the Lord, or to remain in Krsnaconsciousness, is to be factually liberated from the mode of passionand all material contamination.
TEXT 28
yunjann evam sadatmanam
yogi vigata-kalmasahsukhena brahma-samsparsamatyantam sukham asnute
SYNONYMSyunjan--thus being engaged in yoga practice; evam--thus; sada--always;
atmanam--self; yogi--one who is in touch with the Supreme Self; vigata--is freed from; kalmasah--all material contamination; sukhena--intranscendental happiness; brahma-samsparsam--being in constant touch
with the Supreme; atyantam--highest; sukham--happiness; asnute--
attains.
TRANSLATIONSteady in the self, being freed from all material contamination, the
yogi achieves the highest perfetional stage of happiness in touch withthe supreme consciousness.
PURPORTSelf-realization means knowing one's constitutional position in
relationship to the Supreme. The individual soul is part and parcel ofthe Supreme, and his position is to render transcendental service tothe Lord. This transcendental contact with the Supreme is calledbrahma-samsparsa.
TEXT 29
sarva-bhuta-stham atmanam
sarva-bhutani catmaniiksate yoga-yuktatmasarvatra sama-darsanah
SYNONYMSsarva-bhuta-stham--situated in all beings; atmanam--the Supersoul;
sarva--all; bhutani--entities; ca--also; atmani--in the self; iksate--does see; yoga-yukta-atma--one who is dovetailed in Krsnaconsciousness; sarvatra--everywhere; sama-darsanah--seeing equally.
TRANSLATIONA true yogi observes Me in all beings, and also sees every being in Me.
Indeed, the self-realized man sees Me everywhere.
PURPORTA Krsna conscious yogi is the perfect seer because he sees Krsna, the
Supreme, situated in everyone's heart as Supersoul (Paramatma). Isvarahsarva-bhutanam hrd-dese 'rjuna tisthati. The Lord in His Paramatmafeature is situated within both the heart of the dog and that of abrahmana. The perfect yogi knows that the Lord is eternallytranscendental and is not materially affected by His presence in eithera dog or a brahmana. That is the supreme neutrality of the Lord. Theindividual soul is also situated in the individual heart, but he is notpresent in all hearts. That is the distinction between the individualsoul and the Supersoul. One who is not factually in the practice ofyoga cannot see so clearly. A Krsna conscious person can see Krsna inthe heart of both the believer and the nonbeliever. In the smrti thisis confirmed as follows: atatatvac ca matrtvac ca atma hi paramo harih.The Lord, being the source of all beings, is like the mother and themaintainer. As the mother is neutral to all different kinds ofchildren, the supreme father (or mother) is also. Consequently theSupersoul is always in every living being.Outwardly, also, every living being is situated in the energy of theLord. As will be explained in the Seventh Chapter, the Lord has,primarily, two energies--the spiritual (or superior) and the material
(or inferior). The living entity, although part of the superior energy,
is conditioned by the inferior energy; the living entity is always inthe Lord's energy. Every living entity is situated in Him in one way oranother.The yogi sees equally because he sees that all living entities,although in different situations according to the results of fruitivework, in all circumstances remain the servants of God. While in thematerial energy, the living entity serves the material senses; andwhile in spiritual energy, he serves the Supreme Lord directly. Ineither case the living entity is the servant of God. This vision ofequality is perfect in a person in Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 30
yo mam pasyati sarvatra
sarvam ca mayi pasyatitasyaham na pranasyamisa ca me na pranasyati
SYNONYMSyah--whoever; mam--Me; pasyati--sees; sarvatra--everywhere; sarvam--
everything; ca--and; mayi--in Me; pasyati--he sees; tasya--his; aham--I; na--not; pranasyami--am lost; sah--he; ca--also; me--to Me; na--nor;pranasyati--is lost.
TRANSLATIONFor one who sees Me everywhere and sees everything in Me, I am never
lost, nor is he ever lost to Me.
PURPORTA person in Krsna consciousness certainly sees Lord Krsna everywhere,
and he sees everything in Krsna. Such a person may appear to see allseparate manifestations of the material nature, but in each and everyinstance he is conscious of Krsna, knowing that everything is themanifestation of Krsna's energy. Nothing can exist without Krsna, andKrsna is the Lord of everything--this is the basic principle of Krsnaconsciousness. Krsna consciousness is the development of love of Krsna--a position transcendental even to material liberation. It is the stagebeyond self-realization at which the devotee becomes one with Krsna inthe sense that Krsna becomes everything for the devotee and the devoteebecomes full in loving Krsna. An intimate relationship between the Lordand the devotee then exists. In that stage, the living entity attainshis immortality. Nor is the Personality of Godhead ever out of thesight of the devotee. To merge in Krsna is spiritual annihilation. Adevotee takes no such risk. It is stated in the Brahma-samhita (5.38):
premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayantiyam syamasundaram acintya-guna-svarupamgovindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami
"I worship the primeval Lord, Govinda, who is always seen by the
devotee whose eyes are anointed with the pulp of love. He is seen inHis eternal form of Syamasundara situated within the heart of thedevotee."
At this stage, Lord Krsna never disappears from the sight of the
devotee, nor does the devotee ever lose sight of the Lord. In the caseof a yogi who sees the Lord as Paramatma within the heart, the sameapplies. Such a yogi turns into a pure devotee and cannot bear to livefor a moment without seeing the Lord within himself.
TEXT 31
sarva-bhuta-sthitam yo mam
bhajaty ekatvam asthitahsarvatha vartamano 'pisa yogi mayi vartate
SYNONYMSsarva-bhuta-sthitam--situated in everyone's heart; yah--he who; mam--
unto Me; bhajati--serves in devotional service; ekatvam--oneness;asthitah--thus situated; sarvatha--in all respects; varta-manah--beingsituated; api--in spite of; sah--he; yogi--transcendentalist; mayi--unto Me; vartate--remains.
TRANSLATIONThe yogi who knows that I and the Supersoul within all creatures are
one worships Me and remains always in Me in all circumstances.
PURPORTA yogi who is practicing meditation on the Supersoul sees within
himself the plenary portion of Krsna as Visnu--with four hands, holdingconchshell, wheel, club and lotus flower. The yogi should know thatVisnu is not different from Krsna. Krsna in this form of Supersoul issituated in everyone's heart. Furthermore, there is no differencebetween the innumerable Supersouls present in the innumerable hearts ofliving entities. Nor is there a difference between a Krsna consciousperson always engaged in the transcendental loving service of Krsna anda perfect yogi engaged in meditation on the Supersoul. The yogi inKrsna consciousness--even though he may be engaged in variousactivities while in material existence--remains always situated inKrsna. This is confirmed in the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.2.187) ofSrila Rupa Gosvami: nikhilasv apy avasthasu jivan-muktah sa ucyate. Adevotee of the Lord, always acting in Krsna consciousness, isautomatically liberated. In the Narada-pancaratra this is confirmed inthis way:
dik-kalady-anavacchinne
krsne ceto vidhaya catan-mayo bhavati ksipramjivo brahmani yojayet
"By concentrating one's attention on the transcendental form of Krsna,
who is all-pervading and beyond time and space, one becomes absorbed inthinking of Krsna and then attains the happy state of transcendentalassociation with Him."Krsna consciousness is the highest stage of trance in yoga practice.This very understanding that Krsna is present as Paramatma ineveryone's heart makes the yogi faultless. The Vedas (Gopala-tapaniUpanisad 1.21) confirm this inconceivable potency of the Lord as
follows: eko 'pi san bahudha yo 'vabhati. "Although the Lord is one, He
is present in innumerable hearts as many." Similarly, in the smrti-sastra it is said:
eka eva paro visnuh
sarva-vyapi na samsayahaisvaryad rupam ekam casurya-vat bahudheyate
"Visnu is one, and yet He is certainly all-pervading. By His
inconceivable potency, in spite of His one form, He is presenteverywhere, as the sun appears in many places at once."
TEXT 32
atmaupamyena sarvatra
samam pasyati yo 'rjunasukham va yadi va duhkhamsa yogi paramo matah
SYNONYMSatma--self; aupamyena--by comparison; sarvatra--everywhere; samam--
equally; pasyati--sees; yah--he who; arjuna--O Arjuna; sukham--happiness; va--or; yadi--if; va--or; duhkham--distress; sah--such;yogi--transcendentalist; paramah--perfect; matah--considered.
TRANSLATIONHe is a perfect yogi who, by comparison to his own self, sees the true
equality of all beings, both in their happiness and distress, O Arjuna!
PURPORTOne who is Krsna conscious is a perfect yogi; he is aware of everyone's
happiness and distress by dint of his own personal experience. Thecause of the distress of a living entity is forgetfulness of hisrelationship with God. And the cause of happiness is knowing Krsna tobe the supreme enjoyer of all the activities of the human being. Krsnais the proprietor of all lands and planets, and the sincerest friend ofall living entities. The perfect yogi knows that the living being whois conditioned by the modes of material nature is subjected to thethreefold material miseries due to forgetfulness of his relationshipwith Krsna. Because one in Krsna consciousness is happy, he tries todistribute the knowledge of Krsna everywhere. Since the perfect yogitries to broadcast the importance of becoming Krsna conscious, he isthe best philanthropist in the world, and he is the dearest servitor ofthe Lord. Na ca tasman manusyesu kascin me priya-krttamah (Bg. 18.69).In other words, a devotee of the Lord always looks to the welfare ofall living entities, and in this way he is factually the friend ofeveryone. He is the best yogi because he does not desire perfection inyoga for his personal benefit, but tries for others also. He does notenvy his fellow living entities. Here is a contrast between a puredevotee of the Lord and a yogi interested only in his personalelevation. The yogi who has withdrawn to a secluded place in order tomeditate perfectly may not be as perfect as a devotee who is trying hisbest to turn every man toward Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 33
arjuna uvaca
yo 'yam yogas tvaya proktahsamyena madhusudanaetasyaham na pasyamicancalatvat sthitim sthiram
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; yah--the system; ayam--this; yogah--
mysticism; tvaya--by You; proktah--described; samyena--generally;madhu-sudana--O killer of the demon Madhu; etasya--of this; aham--I;na--do not; pasyami--see; cancalatvat--due to being restless; sthitim--situation; sthiram--stable.
TRANSLATIONArjuna said: O Madhusudana, the system of yoga which You have
summarized appears impractical and unendurable to me, for the mind isrestless and unsteady.
PURPORTThe system of mysticism described by Lord Krsna to Arjuna beginning
with the words sucau dese and ending with yogi paramah is here beingrejected by Arjuna out of a feeling of inability. It is not possiblefor an ordinary man to leave home and go to a secluded place in themountains or jungles to practice yoga in this Age of Kali. The presentage is characterized by a bitter struggle for a life of short duration.People are not serious about self-realization even by simple, practicalmeans, and what to speak of this difficult yoga system, which regulatesthe mode of living, the manner of sitting, selection of place, anddetachment of the mind from material engagements. As a practical man,Arjuna thought it was impossible to follow this system of yoga, eventhough he was favorably endowed in many ways. He belonged to the royalfamily and was highly elevated in terms of numerous qualities; he was agreat warrior, he had great longevity, and, above all, he was the mostintimate friend of Lord Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Fivethousand years ago, Arjuna had much better facilities than we do now,yet he refused to accept this system of yoga. In fact, we do not findany record in history of his practicing it at any time. Therefore thissystem must be considered generally impossible in this Age of Kali. Ofcourse it may be possible for some very few, rare men, but for thepeople in general it is an impossible proposal. If this were so fivethousand years ago, then what of the present day? Those who areimitating this yoga system in different so-called schools andsocieties, although complacent, are certainly wasting their time. Theyare completely in ignorance of the desired goal.
TEXT 34
cancalam hi manah krsna
pramathi balavad drdhamtasyaham nigraham manyevayor iva su-duskaram
SYNONYMS
cancalam--flickering; hi--certainly; manah--mind; krsna--O Krsna;
pramathi--agitating; bala-vat--strong; drdham--obstinate; tasya--its;aham--I; nigraham--subduing; manye--think; vayoh--of the wind; iva--like; su-duskaram--difficult.
TRANSLATIONFor the mind is restless, turbulent, obstinate and very strong, O Krsna
and to subdue it, I think, is more difficult than controlling the wind.
PURPORTThe mind is so strong and obstinate that it sometimes overcomes the
intelligence, although mind is supposed to be subservient to theintelligence. For a man in the practical world who has to fight so manyopposing elements, it is certainly very difficult to control the mind.Artificially, one may establish a mental equilibrium toward both friendand enemy, but ultimately no worldly man can do so, for this is moredifficult than controlling the raging wind. In the Vedic literature(Katha Upanisad 1.3.3-4) it is said:
atmanam rathinam viddhi
sariram ratham eva cabuddhim tu sarathim viddhimanah pragraham eva ca
indriyani hayan ahur
visayams tesu gocaranatmendriya-mano-yuktambhoktety ahur manisinah
"The individual is the passenger in the car of the material body, and
intelligence is the driver. Mind is the driving instrument, and thesenses are the horses. The self is thus the enjoyer or sufferer in theassociation of the mind and senses. So it is understood by greatthinkers." Intelligence is supposed to direct the mind, but the mind isso strong and obstinate that it often overcomes even one's ownintelligence. Such a strong mind is supposed to be controlled by thepractice of yoga, but such practice is never practical for a worldlyperson like Arjuna. And what can we say of modern man? The simile usedhere is appropriate: one cannot capture the blowing wind. And it iseven more difficult to capture the turbulent mind. The easiest way tocontrol the mind, as suggested by Lord Caitanya, is chanting "HareKrsna," the great mantra for deliverance, in all humility. The methodprescribed is sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayoh: one must engage one'smind fully in Krsna. Only then will there remain no other engagementsto agitate the mind.
TEXT 35
sri-bhagavan uvaca
asamsayam maha-bahomano durnigraham calamabhyasena tu kaunteyavairagyena ca grhyate
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Personality of Godhead said; asamsayam--
undoubtedly; maha-baho--O mighty-armed one; manah--mind; durnigraham--difficult to curb; calam--flickering; abhyasena--by practice; tu--but;kaunteya--O son of Kunti; vairagyena--by detachment; ca--also; grhyate--can be so controlled.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: O mighty-armed son of Kunti, it is undoubtedly
very difficult to curb the restless mind, but it is possible byconstant practice and by detachment.
PURPORTThe difficulty of controlling the obstinate mind, as expressed by
Arjuna, is accepted by the Personality of Godhead. But at the same timeHe suggests that by practice and detachment it is possible. What isthat practice? In the present age no one can observe the strict rulesand regulations of placing oneself in a sacred place, focusing the mindon the Supersoul, restraining the senses and mind, observing celibacy,remaining alone, etc. By the practice of Krsna consciousness, however,one engages in nine types of devotional service to the Lord. The firstand foremost of such devotional engagements is hearing about Krsna.This is a very powerful transcendental method for purging the mind ofall misgivings. The more one hears about Krsna, the more one becomesenlightened and detached from everything that draws the mind away fromKrsna. By detaching the mind from activities not devoted to the Lord,one can very easily learn vairagya. Vairagya means detachment frommatter and engagement of the mind in spirit. Impersonal spiritualdetachment is more difficult than attaching the mind to the activitiesof Krsna. This is practical because by hearing about Krsna one becomesautomatically attached to the Supreme Spirit. This attachment is calledparesanubhava, spiritual satisfaction. It is just like the feeling ofsatisfaction a hungry man has for every morsel of food he eats.Similarly, by discharge of devotional service one feels transcendentalsatisfaction as the mind becomes detached from material objectives. Itis something like curing a disease by expert treatment and appropriatediet. Hearing of the transcendental activities of Lord Krsna istherefore expert treatment for the mad mind, and eating the foodstuffoffered to Krsna is the appropriate diet for the suffering patient.This treatment is the process of Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 36
asamyatatmana yogo
dusprapa iti me matihvasyatmana tu yatatasakyo 'vaptum upayatah
SYNONYMSasamyata--unbridled; atmana--by the mind; yogah--self-realization;
dusprapah--difficult to obtain; iti--thus; me--My; matih--opinion;vasya--controlled; atmana--by the mind; tu--but; yatata--whileendeavoring; sakyah--practical; avaptum--to achieve; upayatah--appropriate means.
TRANSLATION
For one whose mind is unbridled, self-realization is difficult work.
But he whose mind is controlled and who strives by right means isassured of success. That is My opinion.
PURPORTThe Supreme Personality of Godhead declares that one who does not
accept the proper treatment to detach the mind from material engagementcan hardly achieve success in self-realization. Trying to practice yogawhile engaging the mind in material enjoyment is like trying to ignitea fire while pouring water on it. Similarly, yoga practice withoutmental control is a waste of time. Such a show of yoga practice may bematerially lucrative, but it is useless as far as spiritual realizationis concerned. Therefore, the mind must be controlled by engaging itconstantly in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. Unless oneis engaged in Krsna consciousness, he cannot steadily control the mind.A Krsna conscious person easily achieves the result of yoga practicewithout separate endeavor, but a yoga practitioner cannot achievesuccess without becoming Krsna conscious.
TEXT 37
arjuna uvaca
ayatih sraddhayopetoyogac calita-manasahaprapya yoga-samsiddhimkam gatim krsna gacchati
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; ayatih--unsuccessful transcendentalist;
sraddhaya--with faith; upetah--engaged; yogat--from the mystic link;calita--deviated; manasah--of one who has such a mind; aprapya--failing; yoga-samsiddhim--highest perfection in mysticism; kam--which;gatim--destination; krsna--O Krsna; gacchati--achieves.
TRANSLATIONArjuna said: What is the destination of the man of faith who does not
persevere, who in the beginning takes to the process of self-realization but who later desists due to worldly-mindedness and thusdoes not attain perfection in mysticism?
PURPORTThe path of self-realization or mysticism is described in the Bhagavad-
gita. The basic principle of self-realization is knowledge that theliving entity is not this material body but that he is different fromit and that his happiness is in eternal life, bliss and knowledge.These are transcendental, beyond both body and mind. Self-realizationis sought by the path of knowledge, the practice of the eightfoldsystem or by bhakti-yoga. In each of these processes one has to realizethe constitutional position of the living entity, his relationship withGod, and the activities whereby he can reestablish the lost link andachieve the highest perfectional stage of Krsna consciousness.Following any of the above-mentioned three methods, one is sure to
reach the supreme goal sooner or later. This was asserted by the Lord
in the Second Chapter: even a little endeavor on the transcendentalpath offers a great hope for deliverance. Out of these three methods,the path of bhakti-yoga is especially suitable for this age because itis the most direct method of God realization. To be doubly assured,Arjuna is asking Lord Krsna to confirm His former statement. One maysincerely accept the path of self-realization, but the process ofcultivation of knowledge and the practice of the eightfold yoga systemare generally very difficult for this age. Therefore, despite constantendeavor one may fail for many reasons. First of all, one may not befollowing the process. To pursue the transcendental path is more orless to declare war on the illusory energy. Consequently, whenever aperson tries to escape the clutches of the illusory energy, she triesto defeat the practitioner by various allurements. A conditioned soulis already allured by the modes of material energy, and there is everychance of being allured again, even while performing transcendentaldisciplines. This is called yogac calita-manasah: deviation from thetranscendental path. Arjuna is inquisitive to know the results ofdeviation from the path of self-realization.
TEXT 38
kaccin nobhaya-vibhrastas
chinnabhram iva nasyatiapratistho maha-bahovimudho brahmanah pathi
SYNONYMSkaccit--whether; na--not; ubhaya--both; vibhrastah--deviated from;
chinna--fallen; abhram--cloud; iva--like; nasyati--perishes;apratisthah--without any position; maha-baho--O mighty-armed Krsna;vimudhah--bewildered; brahmanah--of transcendence; pathi--on the path.
TRANSLATIONO mighty-armed Krsna, does not such a man, being deviated from the path
of transcendence, perish like a riven cloud, with no position in anysphere?
PURPORTThere are two ways to progress. Those who are materialists have no
interest in transcendence; therefore they are more interested inmaterial advancement by economic development, or in promotion to thehigher planets by appropriate work. When one takes to the path oftranscendence, one has to cease all material activities and sacrificeall forms of so-called material happiness. If the aspiringtranscendentalist fails, then he apparently loses both ways; in otherwords, he can enjoy neither material happiness nor spiritual success.He has no position; he is like a riven cloud. A cloud in the skysometimes deviates from a small cloud and joins a big one. But if itcannot join a big one, then it is blown away by the wind and becomes anonentity in the vast sky. The brahmanah pathi is the path oftranscendental realization through knowing oneself to be spiritual inessence, part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, who is manifested asBrahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan. Lord Sri Krsna is the fullestmanifestation of the Supreme Absolute Truth, and therefore one who is
surrendered to the Supreme Person is a successful transcendentalist. To
reach this goal of life through Brahman and Paramatma realization takesmany, many births (bahunam janmanam ante). Therefore the supermost pathof transcendental realization is bhakti-yoga, or Krsna consciousness,the direct method.
TEXT 39
etan me samsayam krsna
chettum arhasy asesatahtvad-anyah samsayasyasyachetta na hy upapadyate
SYNONYMSetat--this is; me--my; samsayam--doubt; krsna--O Krsna; chettum--to
dispel; arhasi--requested to do; asesatah--completely; tvat--than You;anyah--without; samsayasya--of the doubt; asya--of this; chetta--remover; na--never; hi--certainly; upapadyate--to be found.
TRANSLATIONThis is my doubt, O Krsna, and I ask You to dispel it completely. But
for Yourself, no one is to be found who can destroy this doubt.
PURPORTKrsna is the perfect knower of past, present and future. In the
beginning of the Bhagavad-gita, the Lord said that all living entitiesexisted individually in the past, they exist now in the present, andthey continue to retain individual identity in the future, even afterliberation from the material entanglement. So He has already cleared upthe question of the future of the individual living entity. Now, Arjunawants to know of the future of the unsuccessful transcendentalist. Noone is equal to or above Krsna, and certainly the so-called great sagesand philosophers who are at the mercy of material nature cannot equalHim. Therefore the verdict of Krsna is the final and complete answer toall doubts, because He knows past, present and future perfectly--but noone knows Him. Krsna and Krsna conscious devotees alone can know whatis what.
TEXT 40
sri-bhagavan uvaca
partha naiveha namutravinasas tasya vidyatena hi kalyana-krt kasciddurgatim tata gacchati
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; partha--O
son of Prtha; na eva--never is it so; iha--in this material world; na--never; amutra--in the next life; vinasah--destruction; tasya--his;vidyate--exists; na--never; hi--certainly; kalyana-krt--one who isengaged in auspicious activities; kascit--anyone; durgatim--degradation; tata--thereafter; gacchati--goes.
TRANSLATION
The Blessed Lord said: Son of Prtha, a transcendentalist engaged in
auspicious activities does not meet with destruction either in thisworld or in the spiritual world; one who does good, My friend, is neverovercome by evil.
PURPORTIn the Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.5.17) Sri Narada Muni instructs Vyasadeva
as follows:
tyaktva sva-dharmam caranambujam harer
bhajann apakvo 'tha patet tato yadiyatra kva vabhadram abhud amusya kimko vartha apto 'bhajatam sva-dharmatah
"If someone gives up all material prospects and takes complete shelter
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, there is no loss or degradationin any way. On the other hand a nondevotee may fully engage in hisoccupational duties and yet not gain anything." For material prospects,there are many activities both scriptural and customary. Atranscendentalist is supposed to give up all material activities forthe sake of spiritual advancement in life, Krsna consciousness. One mayargue that by Krsna consciousness one may attain the highest perfectionif it is completed, but if one does not attain such a perfectionalstage, then he loses both materially and spiritually. It is enjoined inthe scriptures that one has to suffer the reaction of not executingprescribed duties; therefore one who fails to discharge transcendentalactivities properly becomes subjected to these reactions. TheBhagavatam assures the unsuccessful transcendentalist that there needbe no worries. Even though he may be subjected to the reaction of notperfectly executing prescribed duties, he is still not a loser, becauseauspicious Krsna consciousness is never forgotten, and one so engagedwill continue to be so even if he is lowborn in the next life. On theother hand, one who simply follows strictly the prescribed duties neednot necessarily attain auspicious results if he is lacking in Krsnaconsciousness.The purport may be understood as follows: humanity may be divided intotwo sections, namely, the regulated and the nonregulated. Those who areengaged simply in bestial sense gratifications without knowledge oftheir next life or spiritual salvation belong to the nonregulatedsection. And those who follow the principles of prescribed duties inthe scriptures are classified amongst the regulated section. Thenonregulated section, both civilized and noncivilized, educated andnoneducated, strong and weak, are full of animal propensities. Theiractivities are never auspicious, because while enjoying the animalpropensities of eating, sleeping, defending and mating, theyperpetually remain in material existence, which is always miserable. Onthe other hand, those who are regulated by scriptural injunctions andthus gradually rise to Krsna consciousness certainly progress in life.Those who are then following the path of auspiciousness can be dividedinto three sections, namely 1) the followers of scriptural rules andregulations who are enjoying material prosperity, 2) those who aretrying to find out ultimate liberation from material existence, and 3)those who are devotees in Krsna consciousness. Those who are followingthe rules and regulations of the scriptures for material happiness maybe further divided into two classes: those who are fruitive workers and
those who desire no fruit for sense gratification. Those who are after
fruitive results for sense gratification may be elevated to a higherstandard of life--even to the higher planets; but still, because theyare not free from material existence, they are not following the trulyauspicious path. The only auspicious activities are those which leadone to liberation. Any activity which is not aimed at ultimate self-realization or liberation from the material bodily concept of life isnot at all auspicious. Activity in Krsna consciousness is the onlyauspicious activity, and anyone who voluntarily accepts all bodilydiscomforts for the sake of making progress on the path of Krsnaconsciousness can be called a perfect transcendentalist under severeausterity. And because the eightfold yoga system is directed toward theultimate realization of Krsna consciousness, such practice is alsoauspicious, and no one who is trying his best in this matter need feardegradation.
TEXT 41
prapya punya-krtam lokan
usitva sasvatih samahsucinam srimatam geheyoga-bhrasto 'bhijayate
SYNONYMSprapya--after achieving; punya-krtam--of those who performed pious
activities; lokan--planets; usitva--after dwelling; sasvatih--many;samah--years; sucinam--of the pious; sri-matam--of the prosperous;gehe--in the house of; yoga-bhrastah--one who is fallen from the pathof self-realization; abhijayate--takes his birth.
TRANSLATIONThe unsuccessful yogi, after many, many years of enjoyment on the
planets of the pious living entities, is born into a family ofrighteous people, or into a family of rich aristocracy.
PURPORTThe unsuccessful yogis are divided into two classes: one is fallen
after very little progress, and one is fallen after long practice ofyoga. The yogi who falls after a short period of practice goes to thehigher planets where pious living entities are allowed to enter. Afterprolonged life there, he is sent back again to this planet, to takebirth in the family of a righteous brahmana vaisnava or of aristocraticmerchants.The real purpose of yoga practice is to achieve the highest perfectionof Krsna consciousness. But those who do not persevere to such anextent and fail due to material allurements are allowed, by the graceof the Lord, to make full utilization of their material propensities.And after that, they are given opportunities to live prosperous livesin righteous or aristocratic families. Those who are born in suchfamilies may take advantage of the facilities and try to elevatethemselves to full Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 42
atha va yoginam eva
kule bhavati dhimatam
etad dhi durlabhataramloke janma yad idrsam
SYNONYMSatha va--or; yoginam--of learned transcendentalists; eva--certainly;
kule--in the family of; bhavati--takes birth; dhi-matam--of those whoare endowed with great wisdom; etat--this; hi--certainly; durlabha-taram--very rare; loke--in this world; janma--birth; yat--that which;idrsam--like this.
TRANSLATIONOr he takes his birth in a family of transcendentalists who are surely
great in wisdom. Verily, such a birth is rare in this world.
PURPORTBirth in a family of yogis or transcendentalists--those with great
wisdom--is praised herein because the child born in such a familyreceives a spiritual impetus from the very beginning of his life. It isespecially the case in the acarya or gosvami families. Such familiesare very learned and devoted by tradition and training, and thus theybecome spiritual masters. In India there are many such acarya families,but they have now degenerated due to insufficient education andtraining. By the grace of the Lord, there are still families thatfoster transcendentalists generation after generation. It is certainlyvery fortunate to take birth in such families. Fortunately, both ourspiritual master, Om Visnupada Sri Srimad Bhaktisiddhanta SarasvatiGosvami Maharaja, and our humble self, had the opportunity to takebirth in such families, by the grace of the Lord, and both of us weretrained in the devotional service of the Lord from the very beginningof our lives. Later on we met by the order of the transcendentalsystem.
TEXT 43
tatra tam buddhi-samyogam
labhate paurva-dehikamyatate ca tato bhuyahsamsiddhau kuru-nandana
SYNONYMStatra--thereupon; tam--that; buddhi-samyogam--revival of such
consciousness; labhate--regains; paurva--previous; dehikam--bodilyconsciousness; yatate--he endeavors; ca--also; tatah--thereafter;bhuyah--again; samsiddhau--for perfection; kuru-nandana--O son of Kuru.
TRANSLATIONOn taking such a birth, he again revives the divine consciousness of
his previous life, and he tries to make further progress in order toachieve complete success, O son of Kuru.
PURPORT
King Bharata, who took his third birth in the family of a good
brahmana, is an example of good birth for the revival of previoustranscendental consciousness. King Bharata was the emperor of theworld, and since his time this planet is known among the demigods asBharata-varsa. Formerly it was known as Ilavrta-varsa. The emperor, atan early age, retired for spiritual perfection but failed to achievesuccess. In his next life he took birth in the family of a goodbrahmana and was known as Jada Bharata because he always remainedsecluded and did not talk to anyone. And later on, he was discovered asthe greatest transcendentalist by King Rahugana. From his life it isunderstood that transcendental endeavors, or the practice of yoga,never go in vain. By the grace of the Lord the transcendentalist getsrepeated opportunities for complete perfection in Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 44
purvabhyasena tenaiva
hriyate hy avaso 'pi sahjijnasur api yogasyasabda-brahmativartate
SYNONYMSpurva--previous; abhyasena--practice; tena--by the influence of that;
eva--certainly; hriyate--is attracted; hi--surely; avasah--helpless;api--also; sah--he; jijnasuh--willing to know; api--so; yogasya--ofyoga; sabda-brahma--ritualistic principles of scripture; ativartate--transcends.
TRANSLATIONBy virtue of the divine consciousness of his previous life, he
automatically becomes attracted to the yogic principles--even withoutseeking them. Such an inquisitive transcendentalist, striving for yoga,stands always above the ritualistic principles of the scriptures.
PURPORTAdvanced yogis are not very much attracted to the rituals of the
scriptures, but they automatically become attracted to the yogaprinciples, which can elevate them to complete Krsna consciousness, thehighest yoga perfection. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.33.7), suchdisregard of Vedic rituals by the advanced transcendentalists isexplained as follows:
aho bata sva-paco 'to gariyan
yaj-jihvagre vartate nama tubhyamtepus tapas te juhuvuh sasnur aryabrahmanucur nama grnanti ye te
"O my Lord! Persons who chant the holy names of Your Lordship are far,
far advanced in spiritual life, even if born in families of dog-eaters.Such chanters have undoubtedly performed all kinds of austerities andsacrifices, bathed in all sacred places, and finished all scripturalstudies."The famous example of this was presented by Lord Caitanya, who acceptedThakura Haridasa as one of His most important disciples. AlthoughThakura Haridasa happened to take his birth in a Muslim family, he was
elevated to the post of namacarya by Lord Caitanya due to his rigidly
attended principle of chanting three hundred thousand holy names of theLord daily: Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama,Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. And because he chanted the holy nameof the Lord constantly, it is understood that in his previous life hemust have passed through all the ritualistic methods of the Vedas,known as sabda-brahma. Unless, therefore, one is purified, one cannottake to the principle of Krsna consciousness or become engaged inchanting the holy name of the Lord, Hare Krsna.
TEXT 45
prayatnad yatamanas tu
yogi samsuddha-kilbisahaneka-janma-samsiddhastato yati param gatim
SYNONYMSprayatnat--by rigid practice; yatamanah--one who endeavors; tu--but;
yogi--such a transcendentalist; samsuddha--washed off; kilbisah--allkinds of sins; aneka--many, many; janma--births; samsiddhah--soachieved perfection; tatah--thereafter; yati--attains; param--highest;gatim--destination.
TRANSLATIONBut when the yogi engages himself with sincere endeavor in making
further progress, being washed of all contaminations, then ultimately,after many, many births of practice, he attains the supreme goal.
PURPORTA person born in a particularly righteous, aristocratic or sacred
family becomes conscious of his favorable condition for executing yogapractice. With determination, therefore, he begins the unfinished task,and thus he completely cleanses himself of all material contaminations.When he is finally free from all contaminations, he attains the supremeperfection--Krsna consciousness. Krsna consciousness is the perfectstage of being freed of all contaminations. This is confirmed in theBhagavad-gita (7.28):
yesam tv anta-gatam papam
jananam punya-karmanamte dvandva-moha-nirmuktabhajante mam drdha-vratah
"After many, many births of executing pious activities, when one is
completely freed from all contaminations, and from all illusorydualities, one then becomes engaged in the transcendental lovingservice of the Lord."
TEXT 46
tapasvibhyo 'dhiko yogi
jnanibhyo 'pi mato 'dhikahkarmibhyas cadhiko yogitasmad yogi bhavarjuna
SYNONYMS
tapasvibhyah--than the ascetic; adhikah--greater; yogi--the yogi;
jnanibhyah--than the wise; api--also; matah--considered; adhikah--greater than; karmibhyah--than the fruitive worker; ca--also; adhikah--greater than; yogi--the yogi; tasmat--therefore; yogi--atranscendentalist; bhava--just become; arjuna--O Arjuna.
TRANSLATIONA yogi is greater than the ascetic, greater than the empiricist and
greater than the fruitive worker. Therefore, O Arjuna, in allcircumstances, be a yogi.
PURPORTWhen we speak of yoga we refer to linking up our consciousness with the
Supreme Absolute Truth. Such a process is named differently by variouspractitioners in terms of the particular method adopted. When thelinking up process is predominantly in fruitive activities it is calledkarma-yoga, when it is predominantly empirical it is called jnana-yoga,and when it is predominantly in a devotional relationship with theSupreme Lord it is called bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga or Krsnaconsciousness is the ultimate perfection of all yogas, as will beexplained in the next verse. The Lord has confirmed herein thesuperiority of yoga, but He has not mentioned that it is better thanbhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga is full spiritual knowledge, and as suchnothing can excel it. Asceticism without self-knowledge is imperfect.Empiric knowledge without surrender to the Supreme Lord is alsoimperfect. And fruitive work without Krsna consciousness is a waste oftime. Therefore, the most highly praised form of yoga performancementioned here is bhakti-yoga, and this is still more clearly explainedin the next verse.
TEXT 47
yoginam api sarvesam
mad-gatenantar-atmanasraddhavan bhajate yo mamsa me yuktatamo matah
SYNONYMSyoginam--of all yogis; api--also; sarvesam--all types of; mat-gatena--
abiding in Me; antah-atmana--always thinking of Me within; sraddha-van--in full faith; bhajate--renders transcendental loving service; yah--one who; mam--Me (the Supreme Lord); sah--he; me--Mine; yukta-tamah--the greatest yogi; matah--is considered.
TRANSLATIONAnd of all yogis, he who always abides in Me with great faith,
worshiping Me in transcendental loving service, is most intimatelyunited with Me in yoga and is the highest of all.
PURPORT
The word bhajate is significant here. Bhajate has its root in the verb
bhaj, which is used when there is need of service. The English word"worship" cannot be used in the same sense as bhaj. Worship means toadore, or to show respect and honor to the worthy one. But service withlove and faith is especially meant for the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. One can avoid worshiping a respectable man or a demigod andmay be called discourteous, but one cannot avoid serving the SupremeLord without being thoroughly condemned. Every living entity is partand parcel of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and thus every livingentity is intended to serve the Supreme Lord by his own constitution.Failing to do this, he falls down. The Bhagavatam (11.5.3) confirmsthis as follows:
ya esam purusam saksad
atma-prabhavam isvaramna bhajanty avajanantisthanad bhrastah patanty adhah
"Anyone who does not render service and neglects his duty unto the
primeval Lord, who is the source of all living entities, will certainlyfall down from his constitutional position."In this verse also the word bhajanti is used. Therefore, bhajanti isapplicable to the Supreme Lord only, whereas the word "worship" can beapplied to demigods or to any other common living entity. The wordavajananti, used in this verse of Srimad-Bhagavatam, is also found inthe Bhagavad-gita. Avajananti mam mudhah: "Only the fools and rascalsderide the Supreme Personality of Godhead Lord Krsna." Such fools takeit upon themselves to write commentaries on the Bhagavad-gita withoutan attitude of service to the Lord. Consequently they cannot properlydistinguish between the word bhajanti and the word "worship."The culmination of all kinds of yoga practices lies in bhakti yoga. Allother yogas are but means to come to the point of bhakti in bhakti-yoga. Yoga actually means bhakti-yoga; all other yogas are progressionstoward the destination of bhakti-yoga. From the beginning of karma-yogato the end of bhakti-yoga is a long way to self-realization. Karma-yoga, without fruitive results, is the beginning of this path. Whenkarma-yoga increases in knowledge and renunciation, the stage is calledjnana-yoga. When jnana-yoga increases in meditation on the Supersoul bydifferent physical processes, and the mind is on Him, it is calledastanga-yoga. And, when one surpasses the astanga-yoga he comes to thepoint of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsna, it is called bhaktiyoga, the culmination. Factually, bhakti-yoga is the ultimate goal, butto analyze bhakti-yoga minutely one has to understand these otheryogas. The yogi who is progressive is therefore on the true path ofeternal good fortune. One who sticks to a particular point and does notmake further progress is called by that particular name: karma-yogi,jnana-yogi or dhyana-yogi, raja-yogi, hatha-yogi, etc. If one isfortunate enough to come to the point of bhakti-yoga, it is to beunderstood that he has surpassed all other yogas. Therefore, to becomeKrsna conscious is the highest stage of yoga, just as, when we speak ofHimalayan, we refer to the world's highest mountains, of which thehighest peak, Mount Everest, is considered to be the culmination.It is by great fortune that one comes to Krsna consciousness on thepath of bhakti-yoga to become well situated according to the Vedicdirection. The ideal yogi concentrates his attention on Krsna, who iscalled Syamasundara, who is as beautifully colored as a cloud, whoselotus-like face is as effulgent as the sun, whose dress is brilliantwith jewels and whose body is flower-garlanded. Illuminating all sides
is His gorgeous luster, which is called the brahmajyoti. He incarnates
in different forms such as Rama, Nrsimha, Varaha and Krsna, the SupremePersonality of Godhead, and He descends like a human being, as the sonof mother Yasoda, and He is known as Krsna, Govinda and Vasudeva. He isthe perfect child, husband, friend and master, and He is full with allopulences and transcendental qualities. If one remains fully consciousof these features of the Lord, he is called the highest yogi.This stage of highest perfection in yoga can be attained only bybhakti-yoga, as is confirmed in all Vedic literature:
yasya deve para bhaktir
yatha deve tatha gurautasyaite kathita hy arthahprakasante mahatmanah
"Only unto those great souls who have implicit faith in both the Lord
and the spiritual master are all the imports of Vedic knowledgeautomatically revealed." (Svetasvatara Upanisad 6.23)Bhaktir asya bhajanam tad ihamutropadhi-nairasyenamusmin manah-kalpanam, etad eva naiskarmyam. "Bhakti means devotional service to theLord which is free from desire for material profit, either in this lifeor in the next. Devoid of such inclinations, one should fully absorbthe mind in the Supreme. That is the purpose of naiskarmya." (Gopala-tapani Upanisad 1.15)These are some of the means for performance of bhakti, or Krsnaconsciousness, the highest perfectional stage of the yoga system.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Sixth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Sankhya-yoga Brahma-vidya.
Chapter 7
Knowledge of the Absolute
TEXT 1
sri-bhagavan uvaca
mayy asakta-manah parthayogam yunjan mad-asrayahasamsayam samagram mamyatha jnasyasi tac chrnu
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Lord said; mayi--unto Me; asakta-manah-
-mind attached; partha--O son of Prtha; yogam--self-realization;yunjan--so practicing; mat-asrayah--in consciousness of Me (Krsnaconsciousness); asamsayam--without doubt; samagram--completely; mam--unto Me; yatha--as much as; jnasyasi--you can know; tat--that; srnu--try to hear.
TRANSLATIONNow hear, O son of Prtha [Arjuna], how by practicing yoga in full
consciousness of Me, with mind attached to Me, you can know Me in full,free from doubt.
PURPORT
In this Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gita, the nature of Krsna
consciousness is fully described. Krsna is full in all opulences, andhow He manifests such opulences is described herein. Also, four kindsof fortunate people who become attached to Krsna and four kinds ofunfortunate people who never take to Krsna are described in thischapter.In the first six chapters of Bhagavad-gita, the living entity has beendescribed as nonmaterial spirit soul which is capable of elevatinghimself to self-realization by different types of yogas. At the end ofthe Sixth Chapter, it has been clearly stated that the steadyconcentration of the mind upon Krsna, or in other words Krsnaconsciousness, is the highest form of all yoga. By concentrating one'smind upon Krsna, one is able to know the Absolute Truth completely, butnot otherwise. Impersonal brahmajyoti or localized Paramatmarealization is not perfect knowledge of the Absolute Truth because itis partial. Full and scientific knowledge is Krsna, and everything isrevealed to the person in Krsna consciousness. In complete Krsnaconsciousness one knows that Krsna is ultimate knowledge beyond anydoubts. Different types of yoga are only steppingstones on the path ofKrsna consciousness. One who takes directly to Krsna consciousnessautomatically knows about brahmajyoti and Paramatma in full. Bypractice of Krsna consciousness yoga, one can know everything in full--namely the Absolute Truth, the living entities, the material nature,and their manifestations with paraphernalia.One should therefore begin yoga practice as directed in the last verseof the Sixth Chapter. Concentration of the mind upon Krsna the Supremeis made possible by prescribed devotional service in nine differentforms, of which sravanam is the first and most important. The Lordtherefore says to Arjuna, tac chrnu, or "Hear from Me." No one can be agreater authority than Krsna, and therefore by hearing from Him onereceives the greatest opportunity for progress in Krsna consciousness.One has therefore to learn from Krsna directly or from a pure devoteeof Krsna--and not from a nondevotee upstart, puffed up with academiceducation.In the Srimad-Bhagavatam this process of understanding Krsna, theSupreme Personality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth, is described in theSecond Chapter of the First Canto as follows:
srnvatam sva-kathah krsnah
punya-sravana-kirtanahhrdy antah-stho hy abhadranividhunoti suhrt satam
nasta-prayesv abhadresu
nityam bhagavata-sevayabhagavaty uttama-slokebhaktir bhavati naisthiki
tada rajas-tamo-bhavah
kama-lobhadayas ca yeceta etair anaviddhamsthitam sattve prasidati
evam prasanna-manaso
bhagavad-bhakti-yogatahbhagavat-tattva-vijnanammukta-sangasya jayate
bhidyate hrdaya-granthis
chidyante sarva-samsayahksiyante casya karmanidrsta evatmanisvare
"To hear about Krsna from Vedic literatures, or to hear from Him
directly through the Bhagavad-gita, is itself righteous activity. Andfor one who hears about Krsna, Lord Krsna who is dwelling in everyone'sheart, acts as a best-wishing friend and purifies the devotee whoconstantly engages in hearing of Him. In this way, a devotee naturallydevelops his dormant transcendental knowledge. As he hears more aboutKrsna from the Bhagavatam and from the devotees, he becomes fixed inthe devotional service of the Lord. By development of devotionalservice one becomes freed from the modes of passion and ignorance, andthus material lusts and avarice are diminished. When these impuritiesare wiped away, the candidate remains steady in his position of puregoodness, becomes enlivened by devotional service and understands thescience of God perfectly. Thus bhakti-yoga severs the hard knot ofmaterial affection and enables one to come at once to the stage ofasamsayam-samagram, understanding of the Supreme Absolute TruthPersonality of Godhead." (Bhag. 1.2.17-21)Therefore only by hearing from Krsna or from His devotee in Krsnaconsciousness can one understand the science of Krsna.
TEXT 2
jnanam te 'ham sa-vijnanam
idam vaksyamy asesatahyaj jnatva neha bhuyo 'nyajjnatavyam avasisyate
SYNONYMSjnanam--phenomenal knowledge; te--unto you; aham--I; sa--with;
vijnanam--noumenal knowledge; idam--this; vaksyami--shall explain;asesatah--in full; yat--which; jnatva--knowing; na--not; iha--in thisworld; bhuyah--further; anyat--anything more; jnatavyam--knowable;avasisyate--remains to be known.
TRANSLATIONI shall now declare unto you in full this knowledge both phenomenal and
noumenal, by knowing which there shall remain nothing further to beknown.
PURPORTComplete knowledge includes knowledge of the phenomenal world and the
spirit behind it. The source of both of them is transcendentalknowledge. The Lord wants to explain the above-mentioned system ofknowledge because Arjuna is Krsna's confidential devotee and friend. Inthe beginning of the Fourth Chapter this explanation was given by theLord, and it is again confirmed here: complete knowledge can beachieved only by the devotee of the Lord directly from the Lord indisciplic succession. Therefore one should be intelligent enough toknow the source of all knowledge, who is the cause of all causes andthe only object for meditation in all types of yoga practice. When thecause of all causes becomes known, then everything knowable becomes
known, and nothing remains unknown. The Vedas (Mundaka Upanisad 1.3)
say, kasmin bhagavo vijnate sarvam idam vijnatam bhavati.
TEXT 3
manusyanam sahasresu
kascid yatati siddhayeyatatam api siddhanamkascin mam vetti tattvatah
SYNONYMSmanusyanam--of men; sahasresu--out of many thousands; kascit--someone;
yatati--endeavors; siddhaye--for perfection; yatatam--of those soendeavoring; api--indeed; siddhanam--of those who have achievedperfection; kascit--someone; mam--Me; vetti--does know; tattvatah--infact.
TRANSLATIONOut of many thousands among men, one may endeavor for perfection, and
of those who have achieved perfection, hardly one knows Me in truth.
PURPORTThere are various grades of men, and out of many thousands one may be
sufficiently interested in transcendental realization to try to knowwhat is the self, what is the body, and what is the Absolute Truth.Generally mankind is simply engaged in the animal propensities, namelyeating, sleeping, defending and mating, and hardly anyone is interestedin transcendental knowledge. The first six chapters of the Gita aremeant for those who are interested in transcendental knowledge, inunderstanding the self, the Superself and the process of realization byjnana-yoga, dhyana-yoga and discrimination of the self from matter.However, Krsna can only be known by persons who are in Krsnaconsciousness. Other transcendentalists may achieve impersonal Brahmanrealization, for this is easier than understanding Krsna. Krsna is theSupreme Person, but at the same time He is beyond the knowledge ofBrahman and Paramatma. The yogis and jnanis are confused in theirattempts to understand Krsna, although the greatest of theimpersonalists, Sripada Sankaracarya, has admitted in his Gitacommentary that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But hisfollowers do not accept Krsna as such, for it is very difficult to knowKrsna, even though one has transcendental realization of impersonalBrahman.Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the cause of all causes,the primeval Lord Govinda. Isvarah paramah krsnah sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah. anadir adir govindah sarva-karana-karanam. It is verydifficult for the nondevotees to know Him. Although nondevotees declarethat the path of bhakti or devotional service is very easy, they cannotpractice it. If the path of bhakti is so easy, as the nondevotee classof men proclaim, then why do they take up the difficult path? Actuallythe path of bhakti is not easy. The so-called path of bhakti practicedby unauthorized persons without knowledge of bhakti may be easy, butwhen it is practiced factually according to the rules and regulations,the speculative scholars and philosophers fall away from the path.Srila Rupa Gosvami writes in his Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.2.101):
sruti-smrti-puranadi-
pancaratra-vidhim vinaaikantiki harer bhaktirutpatayaiva kalpate
"Devotional service of the Lord that ignores the authorized Vedic
literatures like the Upanisads, Puranas, Narada-pancaratra, etc., issimply an unnecessary disturbance in society."It is not possible for the Brahman-realized impersonalist or theParamatma-realized yogi to understand Krsna the Supreme Personality ofGodhead as the son of mother Yasoda or the charioteer of Arjuna. Eventhe great demigods are sometimes confused about Krsna (muhyanti yatsurayah). Mam tu veda na kascana: "No one knows Me as I am," the Lordsays. And if one does know Him, then sa mahatma su-durlabhah. "Such agreat soul is very rare." Therefore unless one practices devotionalservice to the Lord, he cannot know Krsna as He is (tattvatah), eventhough one is a great scholar or philosopher. Only the pure devoteescan know something of the inconceivable transcendental qualities inKrsna, in the cause of all causes, in His omnipotence and opulence, andin His wealth, fame, strength, beauty, knowledge and renunciation,because Krsna is benevolently inclined to His devotees. He is the lastword in Brahman realization, and the devotees alone can realize Him asHe is. Therefore it is said:
atah sri-krsna-namadi
na bhaved grahyam indriyaihsevonmukhe hi jihvadausvayam eva sphuraty adah
"No one can understand Krsna as He is by the blunt material senses. But
He reveals Himself to the devotees, being pleased with them for theirtranscendental loving service unto Him." (Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu1.2.234)
TEXT 4
bhumir apo 'nalo vayuh
kham mano buddhir eva caahankara itiyam mebhinna prakrtir astadha
SYNONYMSbhumih--earth; apah--water; analah--fire; vayuh--air; kham--ether;
manah--mind; buddhih--intelligence; eva--certainly; ca--and; ahankarah--false ego; iti--thus; iyam--all these; me--My; bhinna--separated;prakrtih--energies; astadha--total eight.
TRANSLATIONEarth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego--all
together these eight constitute My separated material energies.
PURPORTThe science of God analyzes the constitutional position of God and His
diverse energies. Material nature is called prakrti, or the energy of
the Lord in His different purusa incarnations (expansions) as described
in the Satvata-tantra:
visnos tu trini rupani
purusakhyany atho viduhekam tu mahatah srastrdvitiyam tv anda-samsthitamtrtiyam sarva-bhuta-sthamtani jnatva vimucyate
"For material creation, Lord Krsna's plenary expansion assumes three
Visnus. The first one, Maha-Visnu, creates the total material energy,known as mahat-tattva. The second, Garbhodakasayi Visnu, enters intoall the universes to create diversities in each of them. The third,Ksirodakasayi Visnu, is diffused as the all-pervading Supersoul in allthe universes and is known as Paramatma, who is present even within theatoms. Anyone who knows these three Visnus can be liberated frommaterial entanglement."This material world is a temporary manifestation of one of the energiesof the Lord. All the activities of the material world are directed bythese three Visnu expansions of Lord Krsna. These purusas are calledincarnations. Generally one who does not know the science of God(Krsna) assumes that this material world is for the enjoyment of theliving entities and that the living entities are the causes (purusas),controllers and enjoyers of the material energy. According to Bhagavad-gita this atheistic conclusion is false. In the verse under discussionit is stated that Krsna is the original cause of the materialmanifestation. Srimad-Bhagavatam also confirms this. The ingredients ofthe material manifestation are separated energies of the Lord. Even thebrahmajyoti, which is the ultimate goal of the impersonalists, is aspiritual energy manifested in the spiritual sky. There are nospiritual diversities in the brahmajyoti as there are in theVaikunthalokas, and the impersonalist accepts this brahmajyoti as theultimate eternal goal. The Paramatma manifestation is also a temporaryall-pervasive aspect of the Ksirodakasayi Visnu. The Paramatmamanifestation is not eternal in the spiritual world. Therefore thefactual Absolute Truth is the Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsna. Heis the complete energetic person, and He possesses different separatedand internal energies.In the material energy, the principal manifestations are eight, asabove mentioned. Out of these, the first five manifestations, namelyearth, water, fire, air and sky, are called the five gigantic creationsor the gross creations, within which the five sense objects areincluded. They are the manifestations of physical sound, touch, form,taste and smell. Material science comprises these ten items and nothingmore. But the other three items, namely mind, intelligence and falseego, are neglected by the materialists. Philosophers who deal withmental activities are also not perfect in knowledge because they do notknow the ultimate source, Krsna. The false ego--"I am," and "It ismine," which constitute the basic principle of material existence--includes ten sense organs for material activities. Intelligence refersto the total material creation, called the mahat-tattva. Therefore fromthe eight separated energies of the Lord are manifest the twenty-fourelements of the material world, which are the subject matter of Sankhyaatheistic philosophy; they are originally offshoots from Krsna'senergies and are separated from Him, but atheistic Sankhya philosopherswith a poor fund of knowledge do not know Krsna as the cause of allcauses. The subject matter for discussion in the Sankhya philosophy is
only the manifestation of the external energy of Krsna, as it is
described in the Bhagavad-gita.
TEXT 5
apareyam itas tv anyam
prakrtim viddhi me paramjiva-bhutam maha-bahoyayedam dharyate jagat
SYNONYMSapara--inferior; iyam--this; itah--besides this; tu--but; anyam--
another; prakrtim--energy; viddhi--just try to understand; me--My;param--superior; jiva-bhutam--the living entities; maha-baho--O mighty-armed one; yaya--by whom; idam--this; dharyate--being utilized orexploited; jagat--the material world.
TRANSLATIONBesides this inferior nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is a
superior energy of Mine, which comprises all the living entities whoare struggling with material nature and are sustaining the universe.
PURPORTHere it is clearly mentioned that living entities belong to the
superior nature (or energy) of the Supreme Lord. The inferior energy ismatter manifested in different elements, namely earth, water, fire,air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego. Both forms of materialnature, namely gross (earth, etc.) and subtle (mind, etc.), areproducts of the inferior energy. The living entities, who areexploiting these inferior energies for different purposes, are thesuperior energy of the Supreme Lord, and it is due to this energy thatthe entire material world functions. The cosmic manifestation has nopower to act unless it is moved by the superior energy, the livingentity. Energies are always controlled by the energetic, and thereforeliving entities are always controlled by the Lord--they have noindependent existence. They are never equally powerful, asunintelligent men think. The distinction between the living entitiesand the Lord is described in Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.87.30) as follows:
aparimita dhruvas tanu-bhrto yadi sarva-gatas
tarhi na sasyateti niyamo dhruva netarathaajani ca yan-mayam tad avimucya niyantr bhavetsamam anujanatam yad amatam mata-dustataya
"O Supreme Eternal! If the embodied living entities were eternal and
all-pervading like You, then they would not be under Your control. Butif the living entities are accepted as minute energies of YourLordship, then they are at once subject to Your supreme control.Therefore real liberation entails surrender by the living entities toYour control, and that surrender will make them happy. In thatconstitutional position only can they be controllers. Therefore, menwith limited knowledge who advocate the monistic theory that God andthe living entities are equal in all respects are actually misleadingthemselves and others."
The Supreme Lord Krsna is the only controller, and all living entities
are controlled by Him. These living entities are His superior energybecause the quality of their existence is one and the same with theSupreme, but they are never equal to the Lord in quantity of power.While exploiting the gross and subtle inferior energy (matter), thesuperior energy (the living entity) forgets his real spiritual mind andintelligence. This forgetfulness is due to the influence of matter uponthe living entity. But when the living entity becomes free from theinfluence of the illusory material energy, he attains the stage calledmukti, or liberation. The false ego, under the influence of materialillusion, thinks, "I am matter, and material acquisitions are mine."His actual position is realized when he is liberated from all materialideas, including the conception of his becoming one in all respectswith God. Therefore one may conclude that the Gita confirms the livingentity to be only one of the multi-energies of Krsna; and when thisenergy is freed from material contamination, it becomes fully Krsnaconscious, or liberated.
TEXT 6
etad-yonini bhutani
sarvanity upadharayaaham krtsnasya jagatahprabhavah pralayas tatha
SYNONYMSetat--these two natures; yonini--source of birth; bhutani--everything
created; sarvani--all; iti--thus; upadharaya--know; aham--I; krtsnasya--all-inclusive; jagatah--of the world; prabhavah--source ofmanifestation; pralayah--annihilation; tatha--as well as.
TRANSLATIONOf all that is material and all that is spiritual in this world, know
for certain that I am both its origin and dissolution.
PURPORTEverything that exists is a product of matter and spirit. Spirit is the
basic field of creation, and matter is created by spirit. Spirit is notcreated at a certain stage of material development. Rather, thismaterial world is manifested only on the basis of spiritual energy.This material body is developed because spirit is present withinmatter; a child grows gradually to boyhood and then to manhood becauseof that superior energy, spirit soul, being present. Similarly, theentire cosmic manifestation of the gigantic universe is developedbecause of the presence of the Supersoul, Visnu. Therefore spirit andmatter, which combine together to manifest this gigantic universalform, are originally two energies of the Lord, and consequently theLord is the original cause of everything. A fragmental part and parcelof the Lord, namely, the living entity, may by manipulation of materialenergy construct a skyscraper, a factory, or city, but he cannot creatematter out of nothing, and he certainly cannot construct a planet or auniverse. The cause of the universe is the Supersoul, Krsna, theSupreme creator of all individual souls and the original cause of allcauses, as the Katha Upanisad (2.2.13) confirms. (Nityo nityanamcetanas cetananam.)
TEXT 7
mattah parataram nanyat
kincid asti dhananjayamayi sarvam idam protamsutre mani-gana iva
SYNONYMSmattah--beyond Myself; para-taram--superior; na--not; anyat kincit--
anything else; asti--there is; dhananjaya--O conqueror of wealth; mayi--in Me; sarvam--all that be; idam--which we see; protam--strung; sutre--on a thread; mani-ganah--pearls; iva--likened.
TRANSLATIONO conqueror of wealth [Arjuna], there is no truth superior to Me.
Everything rests upon Me, as pearls are strung on a thread.
PURPORTThere is a common controversy over whether the Supreme Absolute Truth
is personal or impersonal. As far as Bhagavad-gita is concerned, theAbsolute Truth is the Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna, and this isconfirmed in every step. In this verse, in particular, it is stressedthat the Absolute Truth is a person. That the Personality of Godhead isthe Supreme Absolute Truth is also the affirmation of the Brahma-samhita: isvarah paramah krsnah sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah; that is, theSupreme Absolute Truth Personality of Godhead is Lord Krsna, who is theprimeval Lord, the reservoir of all pleasure, Govinda, and the eternalform of complete bliss and knowledge. These authorities leave no doubtthat the Absolute Truth is the Supreme Person, the cause of all causes.The impersonalist, however, argues on the strength of the Vedic versiongiven in the Svetasvatara Upanisad (3.10): tato yad uttarataram tadarupam anamayam. ya etad vidur amrtas te bhavanti athetare duhkhamevapiyanti. "In the material world Brahma, the primeval living entitywithin the universe, is understood to be the supreme amongst thedemigods, human beings and lower animals. But beyond Brahma there isthe Transcendence who has no material form and is free from allmaterial contaminations. Anyone who can know Him also becomestranscendental, but those who do not know Him suffer the miseries ofthe material world."The impersonalist puts more stress on the word arupam. But this arupamis not impersonal. It indicates the transcendental form of eternity,bliss and knowledge as described in the Brahma-samhita quoted above.Other verses in the Svetasvatara Upanisad (3.8-9) substantiate this asfollows:
vedaham etam purusam mahantam
aditya-varnam tamasah parastattam eva viditvati mrtyum etinanyah pantha vidyate 'yanaya
yasmat param naparam asti kincid
yasman naniyo no jyayo 'sti kincitvrksa iva stabdho divi tisthaty ekastenedam purnam purusena sarvam
"I know that Supreme Personality of Godhead who is transcendental to
all material conceptions of darkness. Only he who knows Him cantranscend the bonds of birth and death. There is no way for liberationother than this knowledge of that Supreme Person."There is no truth superior to that Supreme Person because He is thesupermost. He is smaller than the smallest, and He is greater than thegreatest. He is situated as a silent tree, and He illumines thetranscendental sky, and as a tree spreads its roots, He spreads Hisextensive energies."From these verses one concludes that the Supreme Absolute Truth is theSupreme Personality of Godhead who is all-pervading by His multi-energies, both material and spiritual.
TEXT 8
raso 'ham apsu kaunteya
prabhasmi sasi-suryayohpranavah sarva-vedesusabdah khe paurusam nrsu
SYNONYMSrasah--taste; aham--I; apsu--in water; kaunteya--O son of Kunti; prabha
asmi--I am the light; sasi-suryayoh--in the sun and the moon; pranavah--the letters a-u-m; sarva--in all; vedesu--in the Vedas; sabdah--soundvibration; khe--in the ether; paurusam--ability; nrsu--in man.
TRANSLATIONO son of Kunti [Arjuna], I am the taste of water, the light of the sun
and the moon, the syllable om in the Vedic mantras; I am the sound inether and ability in man.
PURPORTThis verse explains how the Lord is all-pervasive by His diverse
material and spiritual energies. The Supreme Lord can be preliminarilyperceived by His different energies, and in this way He is realizedimpersonally. As the demigod in the sun is a person and is perceived byhis all-pervading energy, the sunshine, similarly the Lord, although inHis eternal abode, is perceived by His all-pervading, diffusiveenergies. The taste of water is the active principle of water. No onelikes to drink sea water because the pure taste of water is mixed withsalt. Attraction for water depends on the purity of the taste, and thispure taste is one of the energies of the Lord. The impersonalistperceives the presence of the Lord in water by its taste, and thepersonalist also glorifies the Lord for His kindly supplying water toquench man's thirst. That is the way of perceiving the Supreme.Practically speaking, there is no conflict between personalism andimpersonalism. One who knows God knows that the impersonal conceptionand personal conception are simultaneously present in everything andthat there is no contradiction. Therefore Lord Caitanya established Hissublime doctrine: acintya bheda-and-abheda-tattva--simultaneously oneand different.The light of the sun and the moon is also originally emanating from thebrahmajyoti, which is the impersonal effulgence of the Lord. Similarlypranava or the omkara transcendental sound in the beginning of every
Vedic hymn to address the Supreme Lord also emanates from Him. Because
the impersonalists are very much afraid of addressing the Supreme LordKrsna by His innumerable names, they prefer to vibrate thetranscendental sound omkara. But they do not realize that omkara is thesound representation of Krsna. The jurisdiction of Krsna consciousnessextends everywhere, and one who knows Krsna consciousness is blessed.Those who do not know Krsna are in illusion, and so knowledge of Krsnais liberation, and ignorance of Him is bondage.
TEXT 9
punyo gandhah prthivyam ca
tejas casmi vibhavasaujivanam sarva-bhutesutapas casmi tapasvisu
SYNONYMSpunyah--original; gandhah--fragrance; prthivyam--in the earth; ca--
also; tejah--temperature; ca--also; asmi--I am; vibhavasau--in thefire; jivanam--life; sarva--all; bhutesu--living entities; tapah--penance; ca--also; asmi--I am; tapasvisu--in those who practicepenance.
TRANSLATIONI am the original fragrance of the earth, and I am the heat in fire. I
am the life of all that lives, and I am the penances of all ascetics.
PURPORTPunya means that which is not decomposed; punya is original. Everything
in the material world has a certain flavor or fragrance, as the flavorand fragrance in a flower, or in the earth, in water, in fire, in air,etc. The uncontaminated flavor, the original flavor, which permeateseverything, is Krsna. Similarly, everything has a particular originaltaste, and this taste can be changed by the mixture of chemicals. Soeverything original has some smell, some fragrance, and some taste.Vibhava means fire. Without fire we cannot run factories, we cannotcook, etc., and that fire is Krsna. The heat in the fire is Krsna.According to Vedic medicine, indigestion is due to a low temperature inthe belly. So even for digestion fire is needed. In Krsna consciousnesswe become aware that earth, water, fire, air and every activeprinciple, all chemicals and all material elements are due to Krsna.The duration of man's life is also due to Krsna. Therefore by the graceof Krsna, man can prolong his life or diminish it. So Krsnaconsciousness is active in every sphere.
TEXT 10
bijam mam sarva-bhutanam
viddhi partha sanatanambuddhir buddhimatam asmitejas tejasvinam aham
SYNONYMS
bijam--the seed; mam--unto Me; sarva-bhutanam--of all living entities;
viddhi--try to understand; partha--O son of Prtha; sanatanam--original,eternal; buddhih--intelligence; buddhi-matam--of the intelligent; asmi--I am; tejah--prowess; tejasvinam--of the powerful; aham--I am.
TRANSLATIONO son of Prtha, know that I am the original seed of all existences, the
intelligence of the intelligent, and the prowess of all powerful men.
PURPORTBijam means seed; Krsna is the seed of everything. In contact with
material nature, the seed fructifies into various living entities,movable and inert. Birds, beasts, men and many other living creaturesare moving living entities; trees and plants, however, are inert--theycannot move, but only stand. Every entity is contained within the scopeof 8,400,000 species of life; some of them are moving and some of themare inert. In all cases, however, the seed of their life is Krsna. Asstated in Vedic literature, Brahman, or the Supreme Absolute Truth, isthat from which everything is emanating. Krsna is Parabrahman, theSupreme Spirit. Brahman is impersonal and Parabrahman is personal.Impersonal Brahman is situated in the personal aspect--that is statedin Bhagavad-gita. Therefore, originally, Krsna is the source ofeverything. He is the root. As the root of a tree maintains the wholetree, Krsna, being the original root of all things, maintainseverything in this material manifestation. This is also confirmed inthe Vedic literature. Yato va imani bhutani jayante. "The SupremeAbsolute Truth is that from which everything is born." He is the primeeternal among all eternals. He is the supreme living entity of allliving entities, and He alone is maintaining all life. Krsna also saysthat He is the root of all intelligence. Unless a person is intelligenthe cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna.
TEXT 11
balam balavatam caham
kama-raga-vivarjitamdharmaviruddho bhutesukamo 'smi bharatarsabha
SYNONYMSbalam--strength; bala-vatam--of the strong; ca--and; aham--I am; kama--
passion; raga--attachment; vivarjitam--devoid of; dharma-aviruddhah--not against the religious principles; bhutesu--in all beings; kamah--sex life; asmi--I am; bharata-rsabha--O lord of the Bharatas.
TRANSLATIONI am the strength of the strong, devoid of passion and desire. I am sex
life which is not contrary to religious principles, O lord of theBharatas [Arjuna].
PURPORTThe strong man's strength should be applied to protect the weak, not
for personal aggression. Similarly, sex life, according to religious
principles (dharma), should be for the propagation of children, not
otherwise. The responsibility of parents is then to make theiroffspring Krsna conscious.
TEXT 12
ye caiva sattvika bhava
rajasas tamasas ca yematta eveti tan viddhina tv aham tesu te mayi
SYNONYMSye--all those; ca--and; eva--certainly; sattvikah--in goodness; bhavah-
-states of being; rajasah--mode of passion; tamasah--mode of ignorance;ca--also; ye--although; mattah--from Me; eva--certainly; iti--thus;tan--those; viddhi--try to know; na--not; tu--but; aham--I; tesu--inthose; te--they; mayi--unto Me.
TRANSLATIONAll states of being--be they of goodness, passion or ignorance--are
manifested by My energy. I am, in one sense, everything--but I amindependent. I am not under the modes of this material nature.
PURPORTAll material activities in the world are being conducted under the
three modes of material nature. Although these material modes of natureare emanations from the Supreme Lord, Krsna, He is not subject to them.For instance, under the state laws one may be punished, but the king,the lawmaker, is not subject to that law. Similarly, all the modes ofmaterial nature--goodness, passion and ignorance--are emanations fromthe Supreme Lord Krsna, but Krsna is not subject to material nature.Therefore He is nirguna, which means that these gunas, or modes,although issuing from Him, do not affect Him. That is one of thespecial characteristics of Bhagavan, or the Supreme Personality ofGodhead.
TEXT 13
tribhir guna-mayair bhavair
ebhih sarvam idam jagatmohitam nabhijanatimam ebhyah param avyayam
SYNONYMStribhih--three; guna-mayaih--by the three gunas; bhavaih--state of
being; ebhih--all these; sarvam--the whole world; idam--in this world;jagat--universe; mohitam--deluded; na abhijanati--do not know; mam--Me;ebhyah--above these; param--the Supreme; avyayam--inexhaustible.
TRANSLATIONDeluded by the three modes [goodness, passion and ignorance], the whole
world does not know Me, who am above the modes and inexhaustible.
PURPORT
The whole world is enchanted by three modes of material nature. Those
who are bewildered by these three modes cannot understand thattranscendental to this material nature is the Supreme Lord, Krsna. Inthis material world everyone is under the influence of these threegunas and is thus bewildered.By nature living entities have particular types of body and particulartypes of psychic and biological activities accordingly. There are fourclasses of men functioning in the three modes of nature. Those who arepurely in the mode of goodness are called brahmanas. Those who arepurely in the mode of passion are called ksatriyas. Those who are inthe modes of both passion and ignorance are called vaisyas. Those whoare completely in ignorance are called sudras. And those who are lessthan that are animals or animal life. However, these designations arenot permanent. I may either be a brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya orwhatever--in any case, this life is temporary. But although life istemporary and we do not know what we are going to be in the next life,still, by the spell of this illusory energy, we consider ourselves inthe light of this bodily conception of life, and we thus think that weare American, Indian, Russian or brahmana, Hindu, Muslim, etc. And ifwe become entangled with the modes of material nature, then we forgetthe Supreme Personality of Godhead who is behind all these modes. SoLord Krsna says that men, deluded by these three modes of nature, donot understand that behind the background is the Supreme Godhead.There are many different kinds of living entities--human beings,demigods, animals, etc.--and each and every one of them is under theinfluence of material nature, and all of them have forgotten thetranscendent Personality of Godhead. Those who are in the modes ofpassion and ignorance, and even those who are in the mode of goodness,cannot go beyond the impersonal Brahman conception of the AbsoluteTruth. They are bewildered before the Supreme Lord in His personalfeature, which possesses all beauty, opulence, knowledge, strength,fame and renunciation. When even those who are in goodness cannotunderstand, what hope is there for those in passion and ignorance?Krsna consciousness is transcendental to all these three modes ofmaterial nature, and those who are truly established in Krsnaconsciousness are actually liberated.
TEXT 14
daivi hy esa guna-mayi
mama maya duratyayamam eva ye prapadyantemayam etam taranti te
SYNONYMSdaivi--transcendental; hi--certainly; esa--this; guna-mayi--consisting
of the three modes of material nature; mama--My; maya--energy;duratyaya--very difficult to overcome; mam--unto Me; eva--certainly;ye--those; prapadyante--surrender; mayam etam--this illusory energy;taranti--overcome; te--they.
TRANSLATION
This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material
nature, is difficult to overcome. But those who have surrendered untoMe can easily cross beyond it.
PURPORTThe Supreme Personality of Godhead has innumerable energies, and all
these energies are divine. Although the living entities are part of Hisenergies and are therefore divine, due to contact with material energy,their original superior power is covered. Being thus covered bymaterial energy, one cannot possibly overcome its influence. Aspreviously stated, both the material and spiritual natures, beingemanations from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, are eternal. Theliving entities belong to the eternal superior nature of the Lord, butdue to contamination by the inferior nature, matter, their illusion isalso eternal. The conditioned soul is therefore called nitya-baddha, oreternally conditioned. No one can trace out the history of his becomingconditioned at a certain date in material history. Consequently, hisrelease from the clutches of material nature is very difficult, eventhough that material nature is an inferior energy, because materialenergy is ultimately conducted by the supreme will, which the livingentity cannot overcome. Inferior material nature is defined herein asdivine nature due to its divine connection and movement by the divinewill. Being conducted by divine will, material nature, althoughinferior, acts so wonderfully in the construction and destruction ofthe cosmic manifestation. The Vedas confirm this as follows: mayam tuprakrtim vidyan mayinam tu mahesvaram. "Although maya [illusion] isfalse or temporary, the background of maya is the supreme magician, thePersonality of Godhead, who is Mahesvara, the supreme controller."(Svetasvatara Upanisad 4.10)Another meaning of guna is rope; it is to be understood that theconditioned soul is tightly tied by the ropes of illusion. A man boundby the hands and feet cannot free himself--he must be helped by aperson who is unbound. Because the bound cannot help the bound, therescuer must be liberated. Therefore, only Lord Krsna, or His bona fiderepresentative the spiritual master, can release the conditioned soul.Without such superior help, one cannot be freed from the bondage ofmaterial nature. Devotional service, or Krsna consciousness, can helpone gain such release. Krsna, being the Lord of illusory energy, canorder this insurmountable energy to release the conditioned soul. Heorders this release out of His causeless mercy on the surrendered souland out of His paternal affection for the living entity, who isoriginally a beloved son of the Lord. Therefore surrender unto thelotus feet of the Lord is the only means to get free from the clutchesof the stringent material nature.The words mam eva are also significant. Mam means unto Krsna (Visnu)only, and not Brahma or Siva. Although Brahma and Siva are greatlyelevated and are almost on the level of Visnu, it is not possible forsuch incarnations of rajo-guna (passion) and tamo-guna (ignorance) torelease the conditioned soul from the clutches of maya. In other words,both Brahma and Siva are also under the influence of maya. Only Visnuis the master of maya; therefore He alone can give release to theconditioned soul. The Vedas (Svetasvatara Upanisad 3.8) confirm this inthe phrase tam eva viditva. or "Freedom is possible only byunderstanding Krsna." Even Lord Siva affirms that liberation can beachieved only by the mercy of Visnu. Lord Siva says, mukti-pradatasarvesam visnur eva na samsayah: "There is no doubt that Visnu is thedeliverer of liberation for everyone."
TEXT 15
na mam duskrtino mudhah
prapadyante naradhamahmayayapahrta-jnanaasuram bhavam asritah
SYNONYMSna--not; mam--unto Me; duskrtinah--miscreants; mudhah--foolish;
prapadyante--surrender; nara-adhamah--lowest among mankind; mayaya--bythe illusory energy; apahrta--stolen by illusion; jnanah--knowledge;asuram--demonic; bhavam--nature; asritah--accepting.
TRANSLATIONThose miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among mankind, whose
knowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheisticnature of demons, do not surrender unto Me.
PURPORTIt is said in Bhagavad-gita that simply by surrendering oneself unto
the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality Krsna, one can surmount thestringent laws of material nature. At this point a question arises: Howis it that educated philosophers, scientists, businessmen,administrators and all the leaders of ordinary men do not surrender tothe lotus feet of Sri Krsna, the all-powerful Personality of Godhead?Mukti, or liberation from the laws of material nature, is sought by theleaders of mankind in different ways and with great plans andperseverance for a great many years and births. But if that liberationis possible by simply surrendering unto the lotus feet of the SupremePersonality of Godhead, then why don't these intelligent and hard-working leaders adopt this simple method?The Gita answers this question very frankly. Those really learnedleaders of society like Brahma, Siva, Kapila, the Kumaras, Manu, Vyasa,Devala, Asita, Janaka, Prahlada, Bali, and later on Madhvacarya,Ramanujacarya, Sri Caitanya and many others--who are faithfulphilosophers, politicians, educators, scientists, etc.--surrender tothe lotus feet of the Supreme Person, the all-powerful authority. Thosewho are not actually philosophers, scientists, educators,administrators, etc., but who pose themselves as such for materialgain, do not accept the plan or path of the Supreme Lord. They have noidea of God; they simply manufacture their own worldly plans andconsequently complicate the problems of material existence in theirvain attempts to solve them. Because material energy (nature) is sopowerful, it can resist the unauthorized plans of the atheists andbaffle the knowledge of "planning commissions."The atheistic plan-makers are described herein by the word duskrtinah,or "miscreants." Krtina means one who has performed meritorious work.The atheist planmaker is sometimes very intelligent and meritoriousalso, because any gigantic plan, good or bad, must take intelligence toexecute. But because the atheist's brain is improperly utilized inopposing the plan of the Supreme Lord, the atheistic planmaker iscalled duskrtina, which indicates that his intelligence and efforts aremisdirected.
In the Gita it is clearly mentioned that material energy works fully
under the direction of the Supreme Lord. It has no independentauthority. It works as the shadow moves, in accordance with themovements of the object. But still material energy is very powerful,and the atheist, due to his godless temperament, cannot know how itworks; nor can he know the plan of the Supreme Lord. Under illusion andthe modes of passion and ignorance, all his plans are baffled, as inthe case of Hiranyakasipu and Ravana, whose plans were smashed to dustalthough they were both materially learned as scientists, philosophers,administrators and educators. These duskrtinas, or miscreants, are offour different patterns, as outlined below.(1) The mudhas are those who are grossly foolish, like hard-workingbeasts of burden. They want to enjoy the fruits of their labor bythemselves, and so do not want to part with them for the Supreme. Thetypical example of the beast of burden is the ass. This humble beast ismade to work very hard by his master. The ass does not really know forwhom he works so hard day and night. He remains satisfied by fillinghis stomach with a bundle of grass, sleeping for a while under fear ofbeing beaten by his master, and satisfying his sex appetite at the riskof being repeatedly kicked by the opposite party. The ass sings poetryand philosophy sometimes, but this braying only disturbs others. Thisis the position of the foolish fruitive worker who does not know forwhom he should work. He does not know that karma (action) is meant foryajna (sacrifice).Most often, those who work very hard day and night to clear the burdenof self-created duties say that they have no time to hear of theimmortality of the living being. To such mudhas, material gains, whichare destructible, are life's all in all--despite the fact that themudhas enjoy only a very small fraction of the fruit of labor.Sometimes they spend sleepless days and nights for fruitive gain, andalthough they may have ulcers or indigestion, they are satisfied withpractically no food; they are simply absorbed in working hard day andnight for the benefit of illusory masters. Ignorant of their realmaster, the foolish workers waste their valuable time serving mammon.Unfortunately, they never surrender to the supreme master of allmasters, nor do they take time to hear of Him from the proper sources.The swine who eat the stool do not care to accept sweetmeats made ofsugar and ghee. Similarly, the foolish worker will untiringly continueto hear of the sense-enjoyable tidings of the flickering mundane forcethat moves the material world.(2) Another class of duskrti, or miscreant, is called the naradhama, orthe lowest of mankind. Nara means human being, and adhama means thelowest. Out of the 8,400,000 different species of living beings, thereare 400,000 human species. Out of these there are numerous lower formsof human life that are mostly uncivilized. The civilized human beingsare those who have regulative principles of social, political andreligious life. Those who are socially and politically developed, butwho have no religious principles, must be considered naradhamas. Nor isreligion without God religion, because the purpose of followingreligious principles is to know the Supreme Truth and man's relationwith Him. In the Gita the Personality of Godhead clearly states thatthere is no authority above Him and that He is the Supreme Truth. Thecivilized form of human life is meant for man's reviving the lostconsciousness of his eternal relation with the Supreme Truth, thePersonality of Godhead Sri Krsna, who is all-powerful. Whoever losesthis chance is classified as a naradhama. We get information fromrevealed scriptures that when the baby is in the mother's womb (anextremely uncomfortable situation) he prays to God for deliverance and
promises to worship Him alone as soon as he gets out. To pray to God
when he is in difficulty is a natural instinct in every living beingbecause he is eternally related with God. But after his deliverance,the child forgets the difficulties of birth and forgets his delivereralso, being influenced by maya, the illusory energy.It is the duty of the guardians of children to revive the divineconsciousness dormant in them. The ten processes of reformatoryceremonies, as enjoined in the Manu-smrti, which is the guide toreligious principles, are meant for reviving God consciousness in thesystem of varnasrama. However, no process is strictly followed now inany part of the world, and therefore 99.9 percent of the population isnaradhama.When the whole population becomes naradhama, naturally all their so-called education is made null and void by the all-powerful energy ofphysical nature. According to the standard of the Gita, a learned manis he who sees on equal terms the learned brahmana, the dog, the cow,the elephant and the dog-eater. That is the vision of a true devotee.Sri Nityananda Prabhu, who is the incarnation of Godhead as divinemaster, delivered the typical naradhamas, the brothers Jagai andMadhai, and showed how the mercy of a real devotee is bestowed upon thelowest of mankind. So the naradhama who is condemned by the Personalityof Godhead can again revive his spiritual consciousness only by themercy of a devotee.Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, in propagating the bhagavata-dharma oractivities of the devotees, has recommended that people submissivelyhear the message of the Personality of Godhead. The essence of thismessage is Bhagavad-gita. The lowest amongst human beings can bedelivered by this submissive hearing process only, but unfortunatelythey even deny giving an aural reception to these messages, and what tospeak of surrendering to the will of the Supreme Lord? Naradhamas, orthe lowest of mankind, will fully neglect the prime duty of the humanbeing.(3) The next class of duskrti is called mayayapahrta-jnanah, or thosepersons whose erudite knowledge has been nullified by the influence ofillusory material energy. They are mostly very learned fellows--greatphilosophers, poets, literati, scientists, etc.--but the illusoryenergy misguides them, and therefore they disobey the Supreme Lord.There are a great number of mayayapahrta-jnanah at the present moment,even amongst the scholars of the Gita. In the Gita, in plain and simplelanguage, it is stated that Sri Krsna is the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. There is none equal to or greater than Him. He is mentioned asthe father of Brahma, the original father of all human beings. In fact,Sri Krsna is said to be not only the father of Brahma but also thefather of all species of life. He is the root of the impersonal Brahmanand Paramatma; the Supersoul in every entity is His plenary portion. Heis the fountainhead of everything and everyone is advised to surrenderunto His lotus feet. Despite all these clear statements, themayayapahrta-jnanah deride the personality of the Supreme Lord andconsider Him merely another human being. They do not know that theblessed form of human life is designed after the eternal andtranscendental feature of the Supreme Lord.All the unauthorized interpretations of the Gita by the class ofmayayapahrta-jnanah, outside the purview of the parampara system, areso many stumbling blocks on the path of spiritual understanding. Thedeluded interpreters do not surrender unto the lotus feet of Sri Krsna,nor do they teach others to follow this principle.(4) The last class of duskrti is called asuram bhavam asritah, or thoseof demonic principles. This class is openly atheistic. Some of them
argue that the Supreme Lord can never descend upon this material world,
but they are unable to give any tangible reasons as to why not. Thereare others who make Him subordinate to the impersonal feature, althoughthe opposite is declared in the Gita. Envious of the SupremePersonality of Godhead, the atheist will present a number of illicitincarnations manufactured in the factory of his brain. Such personswhose very principle of life is to decry the Personality of Godheadcannot surrender unto the lotus feet of Sri Krsna.Sri Yamunacarya Albandaru of South India said, "O my Lord! You areunknowable to persons involved with atheistic principles, despite Youruncommon qualities, features, and activities and despite Yourpersonality being confirmed by all the revealed scriptures in thequality of goodness, and despite Your being acknowledged by the famousauthorities renowned for their depth of knowledge in the transcendentalscience and situated in the godly qualities."Therefore, (1) grossly foolish persons, (2) the lowest of mankind, (3)the deluded speculators, and (4) the professed atheists, as abovementioned, never surrender unto the lotus feet of the Personality ofGodhead in spite of all scriptural and authoritative advice.
TEXT 16
catur-vidha bhajante mam
janah sukrtino 'rjunaarto jijnasur artharthijnani ca bharatarsabha
SYNONYMScatuh-vidhah--four kinds of; bhajante--render services; mam--unto Me;
janah--persons; su-krtinah--those who are pious; arjuna--O Arjuna;artah--the distressed; jijnasuh--the inquisitive; artha-arthi--one whodesires material gain; jnani--one who knows things as they are; ca--also; bharata-rsabha--O great one amongst the descendants of Bharata.
TRANSLATIONO best among the Bharatas [Arjuna], four kinds of pious men render
devotional service unto Me--the distressed, the desirer of wealth, theinquisitive, and he who is searching for knowledge of the Absolute.
PURPORTUnlike the miscreants, these are adherents of the regulative principles
of the scriptures, and they are called sukrtinah, or those who obey therules and regulations of scriptures, the moral and social laws, andare, more or less, devoted to the Supreme Lord. Out of these there arefour classes of men--those who are sometimes distressed, those who arein need of money, those who are sometimes inquisitive, and those whoare sometimes searching after knowledge of the Absolute Truth. Thesepersons come to the Supreme Lord for devotional service under differentconditions. These are not pure devotees because they have someaspiration to fulfill in exchange for devotional service. Puredevotional service is without aspiration and without desire formaterial profit. The Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.1.11) defines puredevotion thus:
anyabhilasita-sunyam
jnana-karmady-anavrtam
anukulyena krsnanu-silanam bhaktir uttama
"One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord
Krsna favorably and without desire for material profit or gain throughfruitive activities or philosophical speculation. That is called puredevotional service."When these four kinds of persons come to the Supreme Lord fordevotional service and are completely purified by the association of apure devotee, they also become pure devotees. As far as the miscreantsare concerned, for them devotional service is very difficult becausetheir lives are selfish, irregular and without spiritual goals. Buteven some of them, by chance, when they come in contact with a puredevotee, also become pure devotees.Those who are always busy with fruitive activities come to the Lord inmaterial distress and at that time associate with pure devotees andbecome, in their distress, devotees of the Lord. Those who are simplyfrustrated also come sometimes to associate with the pure devotees andbecome inquisitive to know about God. Similarly, when the dryphilosophers are frustrated in every field of knowledge, they sometimeswant to learn of God, and they come to the Supreme Lord to renderdevotional service and thus transcend knowledge of the impersonalBrahman and the localized Paramatma and come to the personal conceptionof Godhead by the grace of the Supreme Lord or His pure devotee. On thewhole, when the distressed, the inquisitive, the seekers of knowledge,and those who are in need of money are free from all material desires,and when they fully understand that material remuneration has nothingto do with spiritual improvement, they become pure devotees. As long assuch a purified stage is not attained, devotees in transcendentalservice to the Lord are tainted with fruitive activities, and theysearch after mundane knowledge, etc. So one has to transcend all thisbefore one can come to the stage of pure devotional service.
TEXT 17
tesam jnani nitya-yukta
eka-bhaktir visisyatepriyo hi jnanino 'tyarthamaham sa ca mama priyah
SYNONYMStesam--out of them; jnani--one in full knowledge; nitya-yuktah--always
engaged; eka--only one; bhaktih--in devotional service; visisyate--especially; priyah--very dear; hi--certainly; jnaninah--person inknowledge; atyartham--highly; aham--I am; sah--he; ca--also; mama--Mine; priyah--dear.
TRANSLATIONOf these, the wise one who is in full knowledge in union with Me
through pure devotional service is the best. For I am very dear to him,and he is dear to Me.
PURPORT
Free from all contaminations of material desires, the distressed, the
inquisitive, the penniless, and the seeker after supreme knowledge canall become pure devotees. But out of them, he who is in knowledge ofthe Absolute Truth and free from all material desires becomes a reallypure devotee of the Lord. And of the four orders, the devotee who is infull knowledge and is at the same time engaged in devotional serviceis, the Lord says, the best. By searching after knowledge one realizesthat his self is different from his material body, and when furtheradvanced he comes to the knowledge of impersonal Brahman and Paramatma.When one is fully purified, he realizes that his constitutionalposition is to be the eternal servant of God. So by association withpure devotees, the inquisitive, the distressed, the seeker aftermaterial amelioration and the man in knowledge all become themselvespure. But in the preparatory stage, the man who is in full knowledge ofthe Supreme Lord and is at the same time executing devotional serviceis very dear to the Lord. He who is situated in pure knowledge of thetranscendence of the Supreme Personality of God is so protected indevotional service that material contamination cannot touch him.
TEXT 18
udarah sarva evaite
jnani tv atmaiva me matamasthitah sa hi yuktatmamam evanuttamam gatim
SYNONYMSudarah--magnanimous; sarve--all; eva--certainly; ete--these; jnani--one
who is in knowledge; tu--but; atma eva--just like Myself; me--My;matam--opinion; asthitah--situated; sah--he; hi--certainly; yukta-atma--engaged in devotional service; mam--unto Me; eva--certainly;anuttamam--the highest goal; gatim--destination.
TRANSLATIONAll these devotees are undoubtedly magnanimous souls, but he who is
situated in knowledge of Me I consider verily to dwell in Me. Beingengaged in My transcendental service, he attains Me.
PURPORTIt is not that other devotees who are less complete in knowledge are
not dear to the Lord. The Lord says that all are magnanimous becauseanyone who comes to the Lord for any purpose is called a mahatma orgreat soul. The devotees who want some benefit out of devotionalservice are accepted by the Lord because there is an exchange ofaffection. Out of affection they ask the Lord for some materialbenefit, and when they get it they become so satisfied that they alsoadvance in devotional service. But the devotee in full knowledge isconsidered to be very dear to the Lord because his only purpose is toserve the Supreme Lord with love and devotion. Such a devotee cannotlive a second without contacting or serving the Supreme Lord.Similarly, the Supreme Lord is very fond of His devotee and cannot beseparated from him.In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (9.4.68), the Lord says:
sadhavo hrdayam mahyam
sadhunam hrdayam tv aham
mad-anyat te na janantinaham tebhyo manag api
"The devotees are always in My heart, and I am always in the hearts of
the devotees. The devotee does not know anything beyond Me, and I alsocannot forget the devotee. There is a very intimate relationshipbetween Me and the pure devotees. Pure devotees in full knowledge arenever out of spiritual touch, and therefore they are very much dear toMe."
TEXT 19
bahunam janmanam ante
jnanavan mam prapadyatevasudevah sarvam itisa mahatma su-durlabhah
SYNONYMSbahunam--many; janmanam--births; ante--after; jnana-van--he possessing
knowledge; mam--unto Me; prapadyate--surrenders; vasudevah--cause ofall causes; sarvam--all; iti--thus; sah--such; maha-atma--great soul;su-durlabhah--very rare.
TRANSLATIONAfter many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge
surrenders unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and allthat is. Such a great soul is very rare.
PURPORTThe living entity, while executing devotional service or transcendental
rituals after many, many births, may actually become situated intranscendental pure knowledge that the Supreme Personality of Godheadis the ultimate goal of spiritual realization. In the beginning ofspiritual realization, while one is trying to give up one's attachmentto materialism, there is some leaning towards impersonalism, but whenone is further advanced he can understand that there are activities inthe spiritual life and that these activities constitute devotionalservice. Realizing this, he becomes attached to the Supreme Personalityof Godhead and surrenders to Him. At such a time one can understandthat Lord Sri Krsna's mercy is everything, that He is the cause of allcauses and that this material manifestation is not independent fromHim. He realizes the material world to be a perverted reflection ofspiritual variegatedness and realizes that in everything there is arelationship with the Supreme Lord Krsna. Thus he thinks of everythingin relation to Vasudeva, or Sri Krsna. Such a universal vision ofVasudeva precipitates one's full surrender to the Supreme Lord SriKrsna as the highest goal. Such surrendered great souls are very rare.This verse is very nicely explained in the Third Chapter (verses 14 and15) of the Svetasvatara Upanisad: "In this body there are powers ofspeaking, of seeing, of hearing, of mental activities, etc. But theseare not important if not related to the Supreme Lord and becauseVasudeva is all-pervading and everything is Vasudeva, the devoteesurrenders in full knowledge (cf. Bhagavad-gita 7.17 and 11.40).
TEXT 20
kamais tais tair hrta-jnanah
prapadyante 'nya-devatahtam tam niyamam asthayaprakrtya niyatah svaya
SYNONYMSkamaih--by desires; taih--by those; taih--by those; hrta--distorted;
jnanah--knowledge; prapadyante--surrender; anya--other; devatah--demigods; tam--that; tam--that; niyamam--rules; asthaya--following;prakrtya--by nature; niyatah--controlled; svaya--by their own.
TRANSLATIONThose whose minds are distorted by material desires surrender unto
demigods and follow the particular rules and regulations of worshipaccording to their own natures.
PURPORTThose who are freed from all material contaminations surrender unto the
Supreme Lord and engage in His devotional service. As long as thematerial contamination is not completely washed off, they are by naturenondevotees. But even those who have material desires and who resort tothe Supreme Lord are not so much attracted by external nature; becauseof approaching the right goal, they soon become free from all materiallust. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is recommended that whether one isfree from all material desires, or is full of material desires, ordesires liberation from material contamination, or is a pure devoteeand has no desire for material sense gratification, he should in allcases surrender to Vasudeva and worship Him.It is said in the Bhagavatam that less intelligent people who have losttheir spiritual sense take shelter of demigods for immediatefulfillment of material desires. Generally, such people do not go tothe Supreme Personality of Godhead, because they are in particularmodes of nature (ignorance and passion) and therefore worship variousdemigods. Following the rules and regulations of worship, they aresatisfied. The worshipers of demigods are motivated by small desiresand do not know how to reach the supreme goal, but a devotee of theSupreme Lord is not misguided. Because in Vedic literature there arerecommendations for worshiping different gods for different purposes(e.g., a diseased man is recommended to worship the sun), those who arenot devotees of the Lord think that for certain purposes demigods arebetter than the Supreme Lord. But a pure devotee knows that the SupremeLord Krsna is the master of all. In the Caitanya-caritamrta (Adi 5.142)it is said, ekale isvara krsna, ara saba bhrtya: only the SupremePersonality of Godhead, Krsna, is master, and all others are servants.Therefore a pure devotee never goes to demigods for satisfaction of hismaterial needs. He depends on the Supreme Lord. And the pure devotee issatisfied with whatever He gives.
TEXT 21
yo yo yam yam tanum bhaktah
sraddhayarcitum icchatitasya tasyacalam sraddham
tam eva vidadhamy aham
SYNONYMSyah--that; yah--that; yam--which; yam--which; tanum--form of the
demigods; bhaktah--devotee; sraddhaya--with faith; arcitum--to worship;icchati--desires; tasya--of that; tasya--of that; acalam--steady;sraddham--faith; tam--him; eva--surely; vidadhami--give; aham--I.
TRANSLATIONI am in everyone's heart as the Supersoul. As soon as one desires to
worship the demigods, I make his faith steady so that he can devotehimself to some particular deity.
PURPORTGod has given independence to everyone; therefore, if a person desires
to have material enjoyment and wants very sincerely to have suchfacilities from the material demigods, the Supreme Lord, as Supersoulin everyone's heart, understands and gives facilities to such persons.As the supreme father of all living entities, He does not interferewith their independence, but gives all facilities so that they canfulfill their material desires. Some may ask why the all-powerful Godgives facilities to the living entities for enjoying this materialworld and so lets them fall into the trap of the illusory energy. Theanswer is that if the Supreme Lord as Supersoul does not give suchfacilities, then there is no meaning to independence. Therefore Hegives everyone full independence--whatever one likes--but His ultimateinstruction we find in the Bhagavad-gita: man should give up all otherengagements and fully surrender unto Him. That will make man happy.Both the living entity and the demigods are subordinate to the will ofthe Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore the living entity cannotworship the demigod by his own desire, nor can the demigod bestow anybenediction without the supreme will. As it is said, not a blade ofgrass moves without the will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.Generally, persons who are distressed in the material world go to thedemigods, as they are advised in the Vedic literature. A person wantingsome particular thing may worship such and such a demigod. For example,a diseased person is recommended to worship the sun-god; a personwanting education may worship the goddess of learning, Sarasvati; and aperson wanting a beautiful wife may worship the goddess Uma, the wifeof Lord Siva. In this way there are recommendations in the sastras(Vedic scriptures) for different modes of worship of differentdemigods. And because a particular living entity wants to enjoy aparticular material facility, the Lord inspires him with a strongdesire to achieve that benediction from that particular demigod, and sohe successfully receives the benediction. The particular mode of thedevotional attitude of the living entity toward a particular type ofdemigod is also arranged by the Supreme Lord. The demigods cannotinfuse the living entities with such an affinity, but because He is theSupreme Lord or the Supersoul who is present in the hearts of allliving entities, Krsna gives impetus to man to worship certaindemigods. The demigods are actually different parts of the universalbody of the Supreme Lord; therefore they have no independence. In theVedic literature it is stated: "The Supreme Personality of Godhead asSupersoul is also present within the heart of the demigod; therefore Hearranges through the demigod to fulfill the desire of the living
entity. But both the demigod and the living entity are dependent on the
supreme will. They are not independent."
TEXT 22
sa taya sraddhaya yuktas
tasyaradhanam ihatelabhate ca tatah kamanmayaiva vihitan hi tan
SYNONYMSsah--he; taya--with that; sraddhaya--with faith; yuktah--endowed;
tasya--his; aradhanam--worship; ihate--seeks; labhate--obtains; ca--and; tatah--from which; kaman--desires; maya--by Me; eva--alone;vihitan--regulated; hi--for; tan--those.
TRANSLATIONEndowed with such a faith, he seeks favors of a particular demigod and
obtains his desires. But in actuality these benefits are bestowed by Mealone.
PURPORTThe demigods cannot award benedictions to the devotees without the
permission of the Supreme Lord. The living entity may forget thateverything is the property of the Supreme Lord, but the demigods do notforget. So the worship of demigods and achievement of desired resultsare due not to the demigods but to the Supreme Personality of Godhead,by arrangement. The less intelligent living entity does not know this,and therefore he foolishly goes to the demigods for some benefit. Butthe pure devotee, when in need of something, prays only to the SupremeLord. Asking for material benefit, however, is not a sign of a puredevotee. A living entity goes to the demigods usually because he is madto fulfill his lust. This happens when something undue is desired bythe living entity and the Lord Himself does not fulfill the desire. Inthe Caitanya-caritamrta it is said that one who worships the SupremeLord and at the same time desires material enjoyment is contradictoryin his desires. Devotional service of the Supreme Lord and the worshipof a demigod cannot be on the same platform because worship of ademigod is material and devotional service to the Supreme Lord iscompletely spiritual.For the living entity who desires to return to Godhead, materialdesires are impediments. A pure devotee of the Lord is therefore notawarded the material benefits desired by less intelligent livingentities who prefer to worship demigods of the material world ratherthan engage in devotional service of the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 23
antavat tu phalam tesam
tad bhavaty alpa-medhasamdevan deva-yajo yantimad-bhakta yanti mam api
SYNONYMS
anta-vat tu--limited and temporary; phalam--fruits; tesam--their; tat--
that; bhavati--becomes; alpa-medhasam--of those of small intelligence;devan--demigods' planets; deva-yajah--worshipers of demigods; yanti--achieve; mat--My; bhaktah--devotees; yanti--attain; mam--to Me; api--surely.
TRANSLATIONMen of small intelligence worship the demigods, and their fruits are
limited and temporary. Those who worship the demigods go to the planetsof the demigods, but My devotees ultimately reach My supreme planet.
PURPORTSome commentators on the Gita say that one who worships a demigod can
reach the Supreme Lord, but here it is clearly stated that theworshipers of demigods go to the different planetary systems wherevarious demigods are situated, just as a worshiper of the sun achievesthe sun or a worshiper of the demigod of the moon achieves the moon.Similarly, if anyone wants to worship a demigod like Indra, he canattain that particular god's planet. It is not that everyone,regardless of whatever demigod is worshiped, will reach the SupremePersonality of Godhead. That is denied here, for it is clearly statedthat the worshipers of the demigods go to different planets in thematerial world, but the devotee of the Supreme Lord goes directly tothe supreme planet of the Personality of Godhead.Here the point may be raised that if the demigods are different partsof the body of the Supreme Lord, then the same end should be achievedby worshiping them. However, worshipers of the demigods are lessintelligent because they don't know to what part of the body food mustbe supplied. Some of them are so foolish that they claim that there aremany parts and many ways to supply food. This isn't very sanguine. Cananyone supply food to the body through the ears or eyes? They do notknow that these demigods are different parts of the universal body ofthe Supreme Lord, and in their ignorance they believe that each andevery demigod is a separate God and a competitor of the Supreme Lord.Not only are demigods parts of the Supreme Lord, but ordinary livingentities are also. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is stated that thebrahmanas are the head of the Supreme Lord, the ksatriyas are the arms,etc., and that all serve different functions. Regardless of thesituation, if one knows that both the demigods and himself are part andparcel of the Supreme Lord, his knowledge is perfect. But if he doesnot understand this, he achieves different planets where the demigodsreside. This is not the same destination the devotee reaches.The results achieved by the demigods' benedictions are perishablebecause within this material world the planets, the demigods and theirworshipers are all perishable. Therefore it is clearly stated in thisverse that all results achieved by worshiping demigods are perishable,and therefore such worship is performed by the less intelligent livingentity. Because the pure devotee engaged in Krsna consciousness indevotional service of the Supreme Lord achieves eternal blissfulexistence that is full of knowledge, his achievements and those of thecommon worshiper of the demigods are different. The Supreme Lord isunlimited; His favor is unlimited; His mercy is unlimited. Thereforethe mercy of the Supreme Lord upon His pure devotees is unlimited.
TEXT 24
avyaktam vyaktim apannam
manyante mam abuddhayahparam bhavam ajanantomamavyayam anuttamam
SYNONYMSavyaktam--nonmanifested; vyaktim--personality; apannam--achieved;
manyante--think; mam--unto Me; abuddhayah--less intelligent persons;param--supreme; bhavam--state of being; ajanantah--without knowing;mama--My; avyayam--imperishable; anuttamam--the finest.
TRANSLATIONUnintelligent men, who know Me not, think that I have assumed this form
and personality. Due to their small knowledge, they do not know Myhigher nature, which is changeless and supreme.
PURPORTThose who are worshipers of demigods have been described as less
intelligent persons, and here the impersonalists are similarlydescribed. Lord Krsna in His personal form is here speaking beforeArjuna, and still, due to ignorance, impersonalists argue that theSupreme Lord ultimately has no form. Yamunacarya, a great devotee ofthe Lord in the disciplic succession from Ramanujacarya, has writtentwo very appropriate verses in this connection. He says,"My dear Lord, devotees like Vyasadeva and Narada know You to be thePersonality of Godhead. By understanding different Vedic literatures,one can come to know Your characteristics, Your form and Youractivities, and one can thus understand that You are the SupremePersonality of Godhead. But those who are in the modes of passion andignorance, the demons, the nondevotees, cannot understand You. They areunable to understand You. However expert such nondevotees may be indiscussing Vedanta and the Upanisads and other Vedic literatures, it isnot possible for them to understand the Personality of Godhead."(Stotra-ratna 12)In the Brahma-samhita it is stated that the Personality of Godheadcannot be understood simply by study of the Vedanta literature. Only bythe mercy of the Supreme Lord can the Personality of the Supreme beknown. Therefore in this verse it is clearly stated that not only arethe worshipers of the demigods less intelligent, but those nondevoteeswho are engaged in Vedanta and speculation on Vedic literature withoutany tinge of true Krsna consciousness are also less intelligent, andfor them it is not possible to understand God's personal nature.Persons who are under the impression that the Absolute Truth isimpersonal are described as abuddhayah, which means one who does notknow the ultimate feature of the Absolute Truth. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is stated that supreme realization begins from theimpersonal Brahman and then rises to the localized Supersoul--but theultimate word in the Absolute Truth is the Personality of Godhead.Modern impersonalists are still less intelligent, for they do not evenfollow their great predecessor, Sankaracarya, who has specificallystated that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.Impersonalists, therefore, not knowing the Supreme Truth, think Krsnato be only the son of Devaki and Vasudeva, or a prince, or a powerfulliving entity. This is also condemned in the Bhagavad-gita (9.11).
Avajananti mam mudha manusim tanum asritam: "Only the fools regard Me
as an ordinary person."The fact is that no one can understand Krsna without renderingdevotional service and without developing Krsna consciousness. The Gitaconfirms this.One cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, or Hisform, quality or name simply by mental speculation or by discussingVedic literature. One must understand Him by devotional service. Whenone is fully engaged in Krsna consciousness, beginning by chanting themaha-mantra--Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama,Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare--then only can one understand theSupreme Personality of Godhead. Nondevotee impersonalists think thatKrsna has a body made of this material nature and that all Hisactivities, His form and everything, are maya. These impersonalists areknown as Mayavadis. They do not know the ultimate truth.The twentieth verse clearly states, kamais tais tair hrta-jnanahprapadyante 'nya-devatah. "Those who are blinded by lusty desiressurrender unto the different demigods." It is accepted that besides theSupreme Personality of Godhead, there are demigods who have theirdifferent planets, and the Lord also has a planet. As stated in thetwenty-third verse, devan deva-yajo yanti mad-bhakta yanti mam api: theworshipers of the demigods go to the different planets of the demigods,and those who are devotees of Lord Krsna go to the Krsnaloka planet.Although this is clearly stated, the foolish impersonalists stillmaintain that the Lord is formless and that these forms areimpositions. From the study of the Gita does it appear that thedemigods and their abodes are impersonal? Clearly, neither the demigodsnor Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, are impersonal. They areall persons; Lord Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and Hehas His own planet, and the demigods have theirs.Therefore the monistic contention that ultimate truth is formless andthat form is imposed does not hold true. It is clearly stated here thatit is not imposed. From the Gita we can clearly understand that theforms of the demigods and the form of the Supreme Lord aresimultaneously existing and that Lord Krsna is sac-cid-ananda, eternalblissful knowledge. The Vedas also confirm that the Supreme AbsoluteTruth is ananda-mayo, or by nature full of blissful pleasure, and thatHe is abhyasat, by nature the reservoir of unlimited auspiciousqualities. And in the Gita the Lord says that although He is aja(unborn), He still appears. These are the facts that we shouldunderstand from the Bhagavad-gita. We cannot understand how the SupremePersonality of Godhead can be impersonal; the imposition theory of theimpersonalist monist is false as far as the statements of the Gita areconcerned. It is clear herein that the Supreme Absolute Truth, LordKrsna, has both form and personality.
TEXT 25
naham prakasah sarvasya
yoga-maya-samavrtahmudho 'yam nabhijanatiloko mam ajam avyayam
SYNONYMSna--nor; aham--I; prakasah--manifest; sarvasya--to everyone; yoga-maya-
-internal potency; samavrtah--covered; mudhah--foolish; ayam--this; na-
-not; abhijanati--can understand; lokah--such less intelligent persons;
mam--Me; ajam--unborn; avyayam--inexhaustible.
TRANSLATIONI am never manifest to the foolish and unintelligent. For them I am
covered by My eternal creative potency [yoga-maya]; and so the deludedworld knows Me not, who am unborn and infallible.
PURPORTIt may be argued that since Krsna was present on this earth and was
visible to everyone, then why isn't He manifest to everyone now? Butactually He was not manifest to everyone. When Krsna was present therewere only a few people who could understand Him to be the SupremePersonality of Godhead. In the assembly of Kurus, when Sisupala spokeagainst Krsna being elected president of the assembly, Bhisma supportedHim and proclaimed Him to be the Supreme God. Similarly, the Pandavasand a few others knew that He was the Supreme, but not everyone. He wasnot revealed to the nondevotees and the common man. Therefore in theGita Krsna says that but for His pure devotees, all men consider Him tobe like themselves. He was manifest only to His devotees as thereservoir of all pleasure. But to others, to unintelligent nondevotees,He was covered by His internal potency.In the prayers of Kunti in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.8.19) it is saidthat the Lord is covered by the curtain of yoga-maya and thus ordinarypeople cannot understand Him. This yoga-maya curtain is also confirmedin the Isopanisad (mantra 15), in which the devotee prays:"O my Lord, You are the maintainer of the entire universe, anddevotional service to You is the highest religious principle.Therefore, I pray that You will also maintain me. Your transcendentalform is covered by the yoga-maya. The brahmajyoti is the covering ofthe internal potency. May You kindly remove this glowing effulgencethat impedes my seeing Your sac-cid-ananda-vigraha, Your eternal formof bliss and knowledge."This yoga-maya curtain is also mentioned in the Fifteenth Chapter ofthe Gita. The Supreme Personality of Godhead in His transcendental formof bliss and knowledge is covered by the internal potency of thebrahmajyoti, and the less intelligent impersonalists cannot see theSupreme on this account. Also in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.14.7) thereis this prayer by Brahma: "O Supreme Personality of Godhead, OSupersoul, O master of all mystery, who can calculate Your potency andpastimes in this world? You are always expanding Your internal potency,and therefore no one can understand You. Learned scientists and learnedscholars can examine the atomic constitution of the material world oreven the planets, but still they are unable to calculate Your energyand potency, although You are present before them." The SupremePersonality of Godhead, Lord Krsna, is not only unborn but also avyaya,inexhaustible. His eternal form is bliss and knowledge, and Hisenergies are all inexhaustible.
TEXT 26
vedaham samatitani
vartamanani carjunabhavisyani ca bhutanimam tu veda na kascana
SYNONYMS
veda--know; aham--I; sama--equally; a titani--past; vartamanani--
present; ca--and; arjuna--O Arjuna; bhavisyani--future; ca--also;bhutani--living entities; mam--Me; tu--but; veda--knows; na--not;kascana--anyone.
TRANSLATIONO Arjuna, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, I know everything that
has happened in the past, all that is happening in the present, and allthings that are yet to come. I also know all living entities; but Me noone knows.
PURPORTHere the question of personality and impersonality is clearly stated.
If Krsna, the form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is consideredby the impersonalists to be maya, to be material, then He would, likethe living entity, change His body and forget everything in His pastlife. Anyone with a material body cannot remember his past life, norcan he foretell his future life, nor can he predict the outcome of hispresent life; therefore he cannot know what is happening in past,present and future. Unless one is liberated from materialcontamination, he cannot know past, present and future.Unlike the ordinary human being, Lord Krsna clearly says that Hecompletely knows what happened in the past, what is happening in thepresent, and what will happen in the future. In the Fourth Chapter wehave seen that Lord Krsna remembers instructing Vivasvan, the sun-god,millions of years ago. Krsna knows every living entity because He issituated in every living being's heart as the Supreme Soul. But despiteHis presence in every living entity as Supersoul and His presencebeyond the material sky, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, theless intelligent cannot realize Him as the Supreme Person. Certainlythe transcendental body of Sri Krsna is not perishable. He is just likethe sun, and maya is like the cloud. In the material world we can seethat there is the sun and that there are clouds and different stars andplanets. The clouds may cover all these in the sky temporarily, butthis covering is only apparent to our limited vision. The sun, moon andstars are not actually covered. Similarly, maya cannot cover theSupreme Lord. By His internal potency He is not manifest to the lessintelligent class of men. As it is stated in the third verse of thischapter, out of millions and millions of men, some try to becomeperfect in this human form of life, and out of thousands and thousandsof such perfected men, hardly one can understand what Lord Krsna is.Even if one is perfected by realization of impersonal Brahman orlocalized Paramatma, he cannot possibly understand the SupremePersonality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, without being in Krsnaconsciousness.
TEXT 27
iccha-dvesa-samutthena
dvandva-mohena bharatasarva-bhutani sammohamsarge yanti parantapa
SYNONYMS
iccha--desire; dvesa--hate; samutthena--born; dvandva--duality; mohena-
-overcome; bharata--O scion of Bharata; sarva--all; bhutani--livingentities; sammoham--into delusion; sarge--in creation; yanti--go;parantapa--O conqueror of enemies.
TRANSLATIONO scion of Bharata [Arjuna], O conqueror of the foe, all living
entities are born into delusion, overcome by the dualities of desireand hate.
PURPORTThe real constitutional position of the living entity is that of
subordination to the Supreme Lord, who is pure knowledge. When one isdeluded into separation from this pure knowledge, he becomes controlledby illusory energy and cannot understand the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. The illusory energy is manifested in the duality of desire andhate. Due to desire and hate, the ignorant person wants to become onewith the Supreme Lord and envies Krsna as the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. Pure devotees, who are not so deluded or contaminated bydesire and hate, can understand that Lord Sri Krsna appears by Hisinternal potencies, but those who are deluded by duality and nesciencethink that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is created by materialenergies. This is their misfortune. Such deluded persons,symptomatically, dwell in dualities of dishonor and honor, misery andhappiness, woman and man, good and bad, pleasure and pain, etc.,thinking, "This is my wife; this is my house; I am the master of thishouse; I am the husband of this wife." These are the dualities ofdelusion. Those who are so deluded by dualities are completely foolishand therefore cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 28
yesam tv anta-gatam papam
jananam punya-karmanamte dvandva-moha-nirmuktabhajante mam drdha-vratah
SYNONYMSyesam--whose; tu--but; anta-gatam--completely eradicated; papam--sin;
jananam--of the persons; punya--pious; karmanam--previous activities;te--they; dvandva--duality; moha--delusion; nirmuktah--free from;bhajante--worship; mam--Me; drdha-vratah--with determination.
TRANSLATIONPersons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life,
whose sinful actions are completely eradicated and who are freed fromthe duality of delusion, engage themselves in My service withdetermination.
PURPORTThose eligible for elevation to the transcendental position are
mentioned in this verse. For those who are sinful, atheistic, foolish
and deceitful, it is very difficult to transcend the duality of desire
and hate. Only those who have passed their lives in practicing theregulative principles of religion, who have acted piously and who haveconquered sinful reactions can accept devotional service and graduallyrise to the pure knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Then,gradually, they can meditate in trance on the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. That is the process of being situated on the spiritualplatform. This elevation is possible in Krsna consciousness in theassociation of pure devotees who can deliver one from delusion.It is stated in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (5.5.2) that if one actuallywants to be liberated he must render service to the devotees (mahat-sevam dvaram ahur vimukteh); but one who associates with materialisticpeople is on the path leading to the darkest region of existence (tamo-dvaram yositam sangi-sangam). All the devotees of the Lord traversethis earth just to recover the conditioned souls from their delusion.The impersonalists do not know that forgetting their constitutionalposition as subordinate to the Supreme Lord is the greatest violationof God's law. Unless one is reinstated in his own constitutionalposition, it is not possible to understand the Supreme Personality orto be fully engaged in His transcendental loving service withdetermination.
TEXT 29
jara-marana-moksaya
mam asritya yatanti yete brahma tad viduh krtsnamadhyatmam karma cakhilam
SYNONYMSjara--old age; marana--death; moksaya--for the purpose of liberation;
mam--unto Me; asritya--taking shelter of; yatanti--endeavor; ye--allthose; te--such persons; brahma--Brahman; tat--actually that; viduh--they know; krtsnam--everything; adhyatmam--transcendental; karma--fruitive activities; ca--and; akhilam--entirely.
TRANSLATIONIntelligent persons who are endeavoring for liberation from old age and
death take refuge in Me in devotional service. They are actuallyBrahman because they entirely know everything about transcendental andfruitive activities.
PURPORTBirth, death, old age and diseases affect this material body, but not
the spiritual body. There is no birth, death, old age and disease forthe spiritual body, so one who attains a spiritual body, becomes one ofthe associates of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and engages ineternal devotional service, is really liberated. Aham brahmasmi: I amspirit. It is said that one should understand that he is Brahman--spirit soul. This Brahman conception of life is also in devotionalservice, as described in this verse. The pure devotees aretranscendentally situated on the Brahman platform, and they knoweverything about transcendental and material activities.
Four kinds of impure devotees who engage themselves in the
transcendental service of the Lord achieve their respective goals, andby the grace of the Supreme Lord, when they are fully Krsna conscious,they actually enjoy spiritual association with the Supreme Lord. Butthose who are worshipers of demigods never reach the Supreme Lord inHis supreme planet. Even the less intelligent Brahman-realized personscannot reach the supreme planet of Krsna known as Goloka Vrndavana.Only persons who perform activities in Krsna consciousness (mamasritya) are actually entitled to be called Brahman, because they areactually endeavoring to reach the Krsna planet. Such persons have nomisgivings about Krsna, and thus they are factually Brahman.Those who are engaged in worshiping the form or arca of the Lord, orwho are engaged in meditation on the Lord simply for liberation frommaterial bondage, also know, by the grace of the Lord, the purports ofBrahman, adhibhuta, etc., as explained by the Lord in the next chapter.
TEXT 30
sadhibhutadhidaivam mam
sadhiyajnam ca ye viduhprayana-kale 'pi ca mamte vidur yukta-cetasah
SYNONYMSsa-adhibhuta--the governing principle of the material manifestation;
adhidaivam--underlying all the demigods; mam--Me; sa-adhiyajnam--sustaining all sacrifices; ca--and; ye--those; viduh--know; prayana--ofdeath; kale--at the time; api--even; ca--and; mam--Me; te--they; viduh--know; yukta-cetasah--with steadfast minds.
TRANSLATIONThose who know Me as the Supreme Lord, as the governing principle of
the material manifestation, who know Me as the one underlying all thedemigods and as the one sustaining all sacrifices, can, with steadfastmind, understand and know Me, even at the time of death.
PURPORTPersons acting in Krsna consciousness are never entirely deviated from
the path of understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In thetranscendental association of Krsna consciousness, one can understandhow the Supreme Lord is the governing principle of the materialmanifestation and even of the demigods. Gradually, by suchtranscendental association, one becomes convinced of the SupremePersonality of Godhead Himself, and at the time of death such a Krsnaconscious person can never forget Krsna. Naturally he is thus promotedto the planet of the Supreme Lord, Goloka Vrndavana.This Seventh Chapter particularly explains how one can become a fullyKrsna conscious person. The beginning of Krsna consciousness isassociation of persons who are in Krsna consciousness. Such associationis spiritual and puts one directly in touch with the Supreme Lord, and,by His grace, one can understand Krsna to be the Supreme God. At thesame time one can really understand the constitutional position of theliving entity and how the living entity forgets Krsna and becomesentangled in material activities. By gradual development of Krsnaconsciousness in good association, the living entity can understand
that due to forgetfulness of Krsna he has become conditioned by the
laws of material nature. He can also understand that this human form oflife is an opportunity to regain Krsna consciousness and that it shouldbe fully utilized to attain the causeless mercy of the Supreme Lord.Many subjects have been discussed in this chapter: the man in distress,the inquisitive man, the man in want of material necessities, knowledgeof Brahman, knowledge of Paramatma, liberation from birth, death anddiseases, and worship of the Supreme Lord. However, he who is actuallyelevated in Krsna consciousness does not care for the differentprocesses. He simply directly engages himself in activities of Krsnaconsciousness and thereby factually attains his constitutional positionas an eternal servitor of Lord Krsna. In such a situation he takespleasure in hearing and glorifying the Supreme Lord in pure devotionalservice. He is convinced that by doing so, all his objectives will befulfilled. This determined faith is called drdha-vrata, and that is thebeginning of bhakti-yoga or transcendental loving service. That is theverdict of all scriptures. This Seventh Chapter of the Gita is thesubstance of that conviction.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Seventh Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Knowledge of the Absolute.
Chapter 8
Attaining the Supreme
TEXT 1
arjuna uvaca
kim tad brahma kim adhyatmamkim karma purusottamaadhibhutam ca kim proktamadhidaivam kim ucyate
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; kim--what; tat--that; brahma--Brahman; kim-
-what; adhyatmam--the self; kim--what; karma--fruitive activities;purusa-uttama--O Supreme Person; adhibhutam--the materialmanifestation; ca--and; kim--what; proktam--is called; adhidaivam--thedemigods; kim--what; ucyate--is called.
TRANSLATIONArjuna inquired: O my Lord, O Supreme Person, what is Brahman? What is
the self? What are fruitive activities? What is this materialmanifestation? And what are the demigods? Please explain this to me.
PURPORTIn this chapter Lord Krsna answers these different questions from
Arjuna beginning with, "What is Brahman?" The Lord also explains karma,fruitive activities, devotional service and yoga principles, anddevotional service in its pure form. The Srimad-Bhagavatam explainsthat the Supreme Absolute Truth is known as Brahman, Paramatma, andBhagavan. In addition, the living entity, individual soul, is alsocalled Brahman. Arjuna also inquires about atma, which refers to body,soul and mind. According to the Vedic dictionary, atma refers to themind, soul, body and senses also.
Arjuna has addressed the Supreme Lord as Purusottama, Supreme Person,
which means that he was putting these questions not simply to a friendbut to the Supreme Person, knowing Him to be the supreme authority ableto give definitive answers.
TEXT 2
adhiyajnah katham ko 'tra
dehe 'smin madhusudanaprayana-kale ca kathamjneyo 'si niyatatmabhih
SYNONYMSadhiyajnah--the Lord of sacrifice; katham--how; kah--who; atra--here;
dehe--in the body; asmin--in this; madhusudana--O Madhusudana; prayana-kale--at the time of death; ca--and; katham--how; jneyah--be known;asi--You can; niyata-atmabhih--by the self-controlled.
TRANSLATIONHow does this Lord of sacrifice live in the body, and in which part
does He live, O Madhusudana? And how can those engaged in devotionalservice know You at the time of death?
PURPORT"Lord of sacrifice" may refer to either Indra or Visnu. Visnu is the
chief of the primal demigods, including Brahma and Siva, and Indra isthe chief of the administrative demigods. Both Indra and Visnu areworshiped by yajna performances. But here Arjuna asks who is actuallythe Lord of yajna (sacrifice) and how is the Lord residing within thebody of the living entity.Arjuna addresses the Lord as Madhusudana because Krsna once killed ademon named Madhu. Actually these questions, which are of the nature ofdoubts, should not have arisen in the mind of Arjuna because Arjuna isa Krsna conscious devotee. Therefore these doubts are like demons.Since Krsna is so expert in killing demons, Arjuna here addresses Himas Madhusudana so that Krsna might kill the demonic doubts that arisein Arjuna's mind.Now the word prayana-kale in this verse is very significant becausewhatever we do in life will be tested at the time of death. Arjunafears that at the time of death, those who are in Krsna consciousnesswill forget the Supreme Lord because at such a time body functions aredisrupted and the mind may be in a panic-stricken state. ThereforeMaharaja Kulasekhara, a great devotee, prays, "My dear Lord, may I dieimmediately now that I am healthy so that the swan of my mind may enterinto the stem of Thy lotus feet." This metaphor is used because theswan often takes pleasure in entering the stem of the lotus flower--similarly, the mind of the pure devotee is drawn to the lotus feet ofthe Lord. Maharaja Kulasekhara fears that at the moment of death histhroat will be so choked up that he will not be able to chant the holynames, so it is better to "die immediately." Arjuna questions how one'smind can remain fixed on Krsna's lotus feet at such times.
TEXT 3
sri-bhagavan uvaca
aksaram brahma paramam
svabhavo 'dhyatmam ucyatebhuta-bhavodbhava-karovisargah karma-samjnitah
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; aksaram--
indestructible; brahma--Brahman; paramam--transcendental; svabhavah--eternal nature; adhyatmam--the self; ucyate--is called; bhuta-bhava-udbhava-karah--action producing the material bodies of the livingentities; visargah--creation; karma--fruitive activities; samjnitah--iscalled.
TRANSLATIONThe Supreme Lord said: The indestructible, transcendental living entity
is called Brahman and his eternal nature is called the self. Actionpertaining to the development of these material bodies is called karma,or fruitive activities.
PURPORTBrahman is indestructible and eternally existing, and its constitution
is not changed at any time. Beyond Brahman there is Parabrahman.Brahman refers to the living entity, and Parabrahman refers to theSupreme Personality of Godhead. The constitutional position of theliving entity is different from the position he takes in the materialworld. In material consciousness, his nature is to try to be the lordof matter, but in spiritual (Krsna) consciousness, his position is toserve the Supreme. When the living entity is in material consciousness,he has to take on various bodies in the material world. That is calledkarma, or varied creation by the force of material consciousness.In Vedic literature the living entity is called jivatma and Brahman,but he is never called Parabrahman. The living entity (jivatma) takesdifferent positions--sometimes he merges into the dark material natureand identifies himself with matter, and sometimes he identifies himselfwith the superior spiritual nature. Therefore he is called the SupremeLord's marginal energy. According to his identification with materialor spiritual nature, he receives a material or spiritual body. Inmaterial nature he may take a body from any of the 8,400,000 species oflife, but in spiritual nature he has only one body. In material naturehe is sometimes manifested as a man, demigod, animal, beast, bird,etc., according to his karma. To attain material heavenly planets andenjoy their facilities, he sometimes performs sacrifices (yajna), butwhen his merit is exhausted, he returns to earth again in the form of aman.In the process of sacrifice, the living entity makes specificsacrifices to attain specific heavenly planets and consequently reachesthem. When the merit of sacrifice is exhausted, then the living entitydescends to earth in the form of rain, then takes on the form ofgrains, and the grains are eaten by man and transformed into semen,which impregnates a woman, and thus the living entity once againattains the human form to perform sacrifice and so repeat the samecycle. In this way, the living entity perpetually comes and goes on thematerial path. The Krsna conscious person, however, avoids suchsacrifices. He takes directly to Krsna consciousness and therebyprepares himself to return to Godhead.
Impersonalist commentators on the Gita unreasonably assume that Brahman
takes the form of jiva in the material world, and to substantiate thisthey refer to Chapter Fifteen, verse 7, of the Gita. But this versealso speaks of the living entity as "an eternal fragment of Myself."The fragment of God, the living entity, may fall down into the materialworld, but the Supreme Lord (Acyuta) never falls down. Therefore thisassumption that the Supreme Brahman assumes the form of jiva is notacceptable. It is important to remember that in Vedic literatureBrahman (the living entity) is distinguished from Parabrahman (theSupreme Lord).
TEXT 4
adhibhutam ksaro bhavah
purusas cadhidaivatamadhiyajno 'ham evatradehe deha-bhrtam vara
SYNONYMSadhibhutam--the physical manifestation; ksarah--constantly changing;
bhavah--nature; purusah--the universal form; ca--and; adhidaivatam--including all demigods like the sun and moon; adhiyajnah--theSupersoul; aham--I (Krsna); eva--certainly; atra--in this; dehe--body;deha-bhrtam--of the embodied; vara--the Supreme.
TRANSLATIONPhysical nature is known to be endlessly mutable. The universe is the
cosmic form of the Supreme Lord, and I am that Lord represented as theSupersoul, dwelling in the heart of every embodied being.
PURPORTThe physical nature is constantly changing. Material bodies generally
pass through six stages: they are born, they grow, they remain for someduration, they produce some by-products, they dwindle, and then theyvanish. This physical nature is called adhibhuta. Because it is createdat a certain point and will be annihilated at a certain point, theconception of the universal form of the Supreme Lord that includes alldemigods and their different planets is called adhidaivata. Theindividual soul (jiva) accompanies the body. The Supersoul, a plenaryrepresentation of Lord Krsna, is called the Paramatma or adhiyajna andis situated in the heart. The word eva is particularly important in thecontext of this verse because by this word the Lord stresses that theParamatma is not different from Him. The Supersoul, the SupremePersonality of Godhead, seated beside the individual soul, is thewitness of the individual soul's activities and is the source ofconsciousness. The Supersoul gives the jiva an opportunity to actfreely, and He witnesses his activities. The functions of all thesedifferent manifestations of the Supreme Lord automatically becomeclarified for the pure Krsna conscious devotee engaged intranscendental service of the Lord. The gigantic universal form of theLord called adhidaivata is contemplated by the neophyte who cannotapproach the Supreme Lord in His manifestation as Supersoul. Theneophyte is advised to contemplate the universal form whose legs areconsidered the lower planets and whose eyes are considered the sun andmoon, and whose head is considered the upper planetary system.
TEXT 5
anta-kale ca mam eva
smaran muktva kalevaramyah prayati sa mad-bhavamyati nasty atra samsayah
SYNONYMSanta-kale--at the end of life; ca--also; mam--unto Me; eva--certainly;
smaran--remembering; muktva--quitting; kalevaram--the body; yah--hewho; prayati--goes; sah--he; mat-bhavam--My nature; yati--achieves; na--not; asti--there is; atra--here; samsayah--doubt.
TRANSLATIONAnd whoever, at the time of death, quits his body, remembering Me
alone, at once attains My nature. Of this there is no doubt.
PURPORTIn this verse the importance of Krsna consciousness is stressed. Anyone
who quits his body in Krsna consciousness is at once transferred to thetranscendental abode of the Supreme Lord. The word smaran("remembering") is important. Remembrance of Krsna is not possible forthe impure soul who has not practiced Krsna consciousness in devotionalservice. To remember Krsna one should chant the maha-mantra, HareKrsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, RamaRama, Hare Hare, incessantly, following in the footsteps of LordCaitanya, being more tolerant than a tree, humbler than the grass andoffering all respect to others without requiring respect in return. Insuch a way one will be able to depart from the body successfullyremembering Krsna and so attain the supreme goal.
TEXT 6
yam yam vapi smaran bhavam
tyajaty ante kalevaramtam tam evaiti kaunteyasada tad-bhava-bhavitah
SYNONYMSyam yam--whatever; va--either; api--also; smaran--remembering; bhavam--
nature; tyajati--give up; ante--at the end; kalevaram--this body; tamtam--similar; eva--certainly; eti--gets; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;sada--always; tat--that; bhava--state of being; bhavitah--remembering.
TRANSLATIONWhatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body, that
state he will attain without fail.
PURPORTThe process of changing one's nature at the critical moment of death is
here explained. How can one die in the proper state of mind? Maharaja
Bharata thought of a deer at the time of death and so was transferred
to that form of life. However, as a deer, Maharaja Bharata couldremember his past activities. Of course the cumulative effect of thethoughts and actions of one's life influences one's thoughts at themoment of death; therefore the actions of this life determine one'sfuture state of being. If one is transcendentally absorbed in Krsna'sservice, then his next body will be transcendental (spiritual), notphysical. Therefore the chanting of Hare Krsna is the best process forsuccessfully changing one's state of being to transcendental life.
TEXT 7
tasmat sarvesu kalesu
mam anusmara yudhya camayy arpita-mano-buddhirmam evaisyasy asamsayah
SYNONYMStasmat--therefore; sarvesu--always; kalesu--time; mam--unto Me;
anusmara--go on remembering; yudhya--fight; ca--also; mayi--unto Me;arpita--surrender; manah--mind; buddhih--intellect; mam--unto Me; eva--surely; esyasi--will attain; asamsayah--beyond a doubt.
TRANSLATIONTherefore, Arjuna, you should always think of Me in the form of Krsna
and at the same time carry out your prescribed duty of fighting. Withyour activities dedicated to Me and your mind and intelligence fixed onMe, you will attain Me without doubt.
PURPORTThis instruction to Arjuna is very important for all men engaged in
material activities. The Lord does not say that one should give up hisprescribed duties or engagements. One can continue them and at the sametime think of Krsna by chanting Hare Krsna. This will free one frommaterial contamination and engage the mind and intelligence in Krsna.By chanting Krsna's names, one will be transferred to the supremeplanet, Krsnaloka, without a doubt.
TEXT 8
abhyasa-yoga-yuktena
cetasa nanya-gaminaparamam purusam divyamyati parthanucintayan
SYNONYMSabhyasa--practice; yoga-yuktena--being engaged in meditation; cetasa--
by the mind and intelligence; na anya-gamina--without their beingdeviated; paramam--the Supreme; purusam--Personality of Godhead;divyam--transcendental; yati--achieves; partha--O son of Prtha;anucintayan--constantly thinking of.
TRANSLATION
He who meditates on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, his mind
constantly engaged in remembering Me, undeviated from the path, he, OPartha [Arjuna], is sure to reach Me.
PURPORTIn this verse Lord Krsna stresses the importance of remembering Him.
One's memory of Krsna is revived by chanting the maha-mantra, HareKrsna. By this practice of chanting and hearing the sound vibration ofthe Supreme Lord, one's ear, tongue and mind are engaged. This mysticmeditation is very easy to practice, and it helps one attain theSupreme Lord. Purusam means enjoyer. Although living entities belong tothe marginal energy of the Supreme Lord, they are in materialcontamination. They think themselves enjoyers, but they are not thesupreme enjoyer. Here it is clearly stated that the supreme enjoyer isthe Supreme Personality of Godhead in His different manifestations andplenary expansions as Narayana, Vasudeva, etc.The devotees can constantly think of the object of worship, the SupremeLord, in any of His features--Narayana, Krsna, Rama, etc., by chantingHare Krsna. This practice will purify him, and at the end of his life,due to his constant chanting, he will be transferred to the kingdom ofGod. Yoga practice is meditation on the Supersoul within; similarly, bychanting Hare Krsna one fixes his mind always on the Supreme Lord. Themind is fickle, and therefore it is necessary to engage the mind byforce to think of Krsna. One example often given is that of thecaterpillar that thinks of becoming a butterfly and so is transformedinto a butterfly in the same life. Similarly, if we constantly think ofKrsna, it is certain that at the end of our lives we shall have thesame bodily constitution as Krsna.
TEXT 9
kavim puranam anusasitaram
anor aniyamsam anusmared yahsarvasya dhataram acintya-rupamaditya-varnam tamasah parastat
SYNONYMSkavim--one who knows everything; puranam--the oldest; anusasitaram--the
controller; anoh--of the atom; aniyamsam--smaller than; anusmaret--always thinking; yah--one who; sarvasya--of everything; dhataram--themaintainer; acintya--inconceivable; rupam--form; aditya-varnam--illuminated like the sun; tamasah--of the darkness; parastat--transcendental.
TRANSLATIONOne should meditate upon the Supreme Person as the one who knows
everything, as He who is the oldest, who is the controller, who issmaller than the smallest, who is the maintainer of everything, who isbeyond all material conception, who is inconceivable, and who is alwaysa person. He is luminous like the sun and, being transcendental, isbeyond this material nature.
PURPORT
The process of thinking of the Supreme is mentioned in this verse. The
foremost point is that He is not impersonal or void. One cannotmeditate on something impersonal or void. That is very difficult. Theprocess of thinking of Krsna, however, is very easy and is factuallystated herein. First of all, He is purusa, spiritual, Rama and Krsna,and is described herein as kavim; that is, He knows past, present andfuture and therefore knows everything. He is the oldest personalitybecause He is the origin of everything; everything is born out of Him.He is also the supreme controller of the universe, maintainer andinstructor of humanity. He is smaller than the smallest. The livingentity is one ten-thousandth part of the tip of a hair, but the Lord isso inconceivably small that He enters into the heart of this particle.Therefore He is called smaller than the smallest. As the Supreme, Hecan enter into the atom and into the heart of the smallest and controlhim as the Supersoul. Although so small, He is still all-pervading andis maintaining everything. By Him all these planetary systems aresustained. We often wonder how these big planets are floating in theair. It is stated here that the Supreme Lord, by His inconceivableenergy, is sustaining all these big planets and systems of galaxies.The word acintya (inconceivable) is very significant in thisconnection. God's energy is beyond our conception, beyond our thinkingjurisdiction, and is therefore called inconceivable (acintya). Who canargue this point? He pervades this material world and yet is beyond it.We cannot even comprehend this material world, which is insignificantcompared to the spiritual world--so how can we comprehend what isbeyond? Acintya means that which is beyond this material world, thatwhich our argument, logic and philosophical speculation cannot touch,that which is inconceivable. Therefore intelligent persons, avoidinguseless argument and speculation, should accept what is stated inscriptures like the Vedas, Gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam and follow theprinciples they set down. This will lead one to understanding.
TEXT 10
prayana-kale manasacalena
bhaktya yukto yoga-balena caivabhruvor madhye pranam avesya samyaksa tam param purusam upaiti divyam
SYNONYMSprayana-kale--at the time of death; manasa--by the mind; acalena--
without being deviated; bhaktya--in full devotion; yuktah--engaged;yoga-balena--by the power of mystic yoga; ca--also; eva--certainly;bhruvoh--between the two eyebrows; madhye--in; pranam--the life air;avesya--establishing; samyak--completely; sah--he; tam--that; param--transcendental; purusam--Personality of Godhead; upaiti--achieves;divyam--in the spiritual kingdom.
TRANSLATIONOne who, at the time of death, fixes his life air between the eyebrows
and in full devotion engages himself in remembering the Supreme Lord,will certainly attain to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
In this verse it is clearly stated that at the time of death the mind
must be fixed in devotion on the Supreme Godhead. For those practicedin yoga, it is recommended that they raise the life force between theeyebrows, but for a pure devotee who does not practice such yoga, themind should always be engaged in Krsna consciousness so that at deathhe can remember the Supreme by His grace. This is explained in versefourteen.The particular use of the word yoga-balena is significant in this versebecause without practice of yoga one cannot come to this transcendentalstate of being at the time of death. One cannot suddenly remember theSupreme Lord at death unless he is practiced in some yoga system,especially the system of bhakti-yoga. Since one's mind at death is verydisturbed, one should practice transcendence through yoga during one'slife.
TEXT 11
yad aksaram veda-vido vadanti
visanti yad yatayo vita-ragahyad icchanto brahmacaryam carantitat te padam sangrahena pravaksye
SYNONYMSyat--that which; aksaram--inexhaustible; veda-vidah--a person
conversant with the Vedas; vadanti--say; visanti--enters; yat--inwhich; yatayah--great sages; vita-ragah--in the renounced order oflife; yat--that which; icchantah--desiring; brahmacaryam--celibacy;caranti--practices; tat--that; te--unto you; padam--situation;sangrahena--in summary; pravaksye--I shall explain.
TRANSLATIONPersons learned in the Vedas, who utter omkara and who are great sages
in the renounced order, enter into Brahman. Desiring such perfection,one practices celibacy. I shall now explain to you this process bywhich one may attain salvation.
PURPORTLord Krsna explains that Brahman, although one without a second, has
different manifestations and features. For the impersonalists, thesyllable om is identical with Brahman. Krsna here explains theimpersonal Brahman, in which the renounced order of sages enter.In the Vedic system of knowledge, students, from the very beginning,are taught to vibrate om and learn of the ultimate impersonal Brahmanby living with the spiritual master in complete celibacy. In this waythey realize two of Brahman's features. This practice is very essentialfor the student's advancement in spiritual life, but at the moment suchbrahmacari (unmarried celibate) life is not at all possible. The socialconstruction of the world has changed so much that there is nopossibility of one's practicing celibacy from the beginning of studentlife. Throughout the world there are many institutions for differentdepartments of knowledge, but there is no recognized institution wherestudents can be educated in the brahmacari principles. Unless onepractices celibacy, advancement in spiritual life is very difficult.Therefore Lord Caitanya has announced, according to the scripturalinjunctions for this Age of Kali, that no process of realizing the
Supreme is possible except the chanting of the holy name of Lord Krsna:
Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama,Rama Rama, Hare Hare.
TEXT 12
sarva-dvarani samyamya
mano hrdi nirudhya camurdhny adhayatmanah pranamasthito yoga-dharanam
SYNONYMSsarva-dvarani--all the doors of the body; samyamya--controlling; manah-
-mind; hrdi--in the heart; nirudhya--confined; ca--also; murdhni--onthe head; adhaya--fixed; atmanah--soul; pranam--the life air; asthitah--situated; yoga-dharanam--the yogic situation.
TRANSLATIONThe yogic situation is that of detachment from all sensual engagements.
Closing all the doors of the senses and fixing the mind on the heartand the life air at the top of the head, one establishes himself inyoga.
PURPORTTo practice yoga, as suggested here, one first has to close the door of
all sense enjoyment. This practice is called pratyahara, or withdrawingthe senses from the sense objects. The sense organs for acquiringknowledge, such as the eyes, ears, nose, tongue and touch, should befully controlled and should not be allowed to engage in self-gratification. In this way the mind focuses on the Supersoul in theheart and the life force is raised to the top of the head. In the SixthChapter this process is described in detail. But as mentioned before,this practice is not practical in this age. The best process is Krsnaconsciousness. If one is always able to fix his mind on Krsna indevotional service, it is very easy for him to remain in an undisturbedtranscendental trance, or in samadhi.
TEXT 13
om ity ekaksaram brahma
vyaharan mam anusmaranyah prayati tyajan dehamsa yati paramam gatim
SYNONYMSom--the combination of letters om (omkara); iti--thus; eka-aksaram--
supreme, indestructible; brahma--absolute; vyaharan--vibrating; mam--Me(Krsna); anusmaran--remembering; yah--anyone; prayati--leaves; tyajan--quitting; deham--this body; sah--he; yati--achieves; paramam--supreme;gatim--destination.
TRANSLATION
After being situated in this yoga practice and vibrating the sacred
syllable om, the supreme combination of letters, if one thinks of theSupreme Personality of Godhead and quits his body, he will certainlyreach the spiritual planets.
PURPORTIt is clearly stated here that om, Brahman, and Lord Krsna are not
different. The impersonal sound of Krsna is om, but the sound HareKrsna contains om. It is clearly recommended in this age that if onequits his body at the end of this life chanting the maha-mantra, HareKrsna, he will reach the spiritual planets. Similarly, those who aredevotees of Krsna enter the Krsna planet or Goloka Vrndavana, whereasthe impersonalists remain in the brahmajyoti. The personalists alsoenter many innumerable planets in the spiritual sky known asVaikunthas.
TEXT 14
ananya-cetah satatam
yo mam smarati nityasahtasyaham sulabhah parthanitya-yuktasya yoginah
SYNONYMSananya-cetah--without deviation; satatam--always; yah--anyone; mam--Me
(Krsna); smarati--remembers; nityasah--regularly; tasya--to him; aham--I am; su-labhah--very easy to achieve; partha--O son of Prtha; nitya--regularly; yuktasya--engaged; yoginah--of the devotee.
TRANSLATIONFor one who remembers Me without deviation, I am easy to obtain, O son
of Prtha, because of his constant engagement in devotional service.
PURPORTIn this verse the bhakti-yoga of the unalloyed devotees of the Supreme
Godhead is described. The proceeding verses mention four differentkinds of devotees--the distressed, the inquisitive, those who seekmaterial gain, and the speculative philosophers. Different processes ofliberation from material entanglement have also been described: karma-yoga, jnana-yoga, and hatha-yoga. But here bhakti-yoga, without anymixture of these, is mentioned. In bhakti-yoga the devotees desirenothing but Krsna. The pure bhakti devotee does not desire promotion toheavenly planets, nor does he seek salvation or liberation frommaterial entanglement. A pure devotee does not desire anything. In theCaitanya-caritamrta the pure devotee is called niskama, which means hehas no desire for self-interest. Perfect peace belongs to him alone,not to those who strive for personal gain. The pure devotee only wantsto please the Supreme Lord, and so the Lord says that for anyone who isunflinchingly devoted to Him, He is easy to attain. The devotee canrender service to any of the transcendental forms of the Supreme Lord,and he meets with none of the problems that plague the practitioners ofother yogas. Bhakti-yoga is very simple and pure and easy to perform.One can begin simply by chanting Hare Krsna. Krsna is very merciful tothose who engage in His service, and He helps in various ways that
devotee who has fully surrendered to Him so that he can understand Him
as He is. The Lord gives such a devotee sufficient intelligence so thatultimately the devotee can attain Him in His spiritual kingdom.The special qualification of the pure devotee is that he is alwaysthinking of Krsna without considering the time or place. There shouldbe no impediments. He should be able to carry out his service anywhereand at any time. Some say that the devotee should remain in holy placeslike Vrndavana or some holy town where the Lord lived, but a puredevotee can live anywhere and create the atmosphere of Vrndavana by hisdevotional service. It was Sri Advaita who told Lord Caitanya,"Wherever You are, O Lord--there is Vrndavana."A pure devotee constantly remembers Krsna and meditates upon Him. Theseare qualifications of the pure devotee for whom the Lord is most easilyattainable. Bhakti-yoga is the system that the Gita recommends aboveall others. Generally, the bhakti-yogis are engaged in five differentways: 1) santa-bhakta, engaged in devotional service in neutrality; 2)dasya-bhakta, engaged in devotional service as servant; 3) sakhya-bhakta, engaged as friend; 4) vatsalya-bhakta, engaged as parent; and5) madhurya-bhakta, engaged as conjugal lover of the Supreme Lord. Inany of these ways, the pure devotee is always constantly engaged in thetranscendental loving service of the Supreme Lord and cannot forget theSupreme Lord, and so for him the Lord is easily attained. A puredevotee cannot forget the Supreme Lord for a moment, and similarly, theSupreme Lord cannot forget His pure devotee for a moment. This is thegreat blessing of the Krsna conscious process of chanting the maha-mantra--Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, HareRama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.
TEXT 15
mam upetya punar janma
duhkhalayam asasvatamnapnuvanti mahatmanahsamsiddhim paramam gatah
SYNONYMSmam--unto Me; upetya--achieving; punah--again; janma--birth; duhkha-
alayam--a place of miseries; asasvatam--temporary; na--never;apnuvanti--attain; maha-atmanah--the great souls; samsiddhim--perfection; paramam--ultimate; gatah--achieved.
TRANSLATIONAfter attaining Me, the great souls, who are yogis in devotion, never
return to this temporary world, which is full of miseries, because theyhave attained the highest perfection.
PURPORTSince this temporary material world is full of the miseries of birth,
old age, disease and death, naturally he who achieves the highestperfection and attains the supreme planet, Krsnaloka, Goloka Vrndavana,does not wish to return. The supreme planet is described in Vedicliterature as beyond our material vision, and it is considered thehighest goal. The mahatmas (great souls) receive transcendentalmessages from the realized devotees and thus gradually developdevotional service in Krsna consciousness and become so absorbed in
transcendental service that they no longer desire elevation to any of
the material planets, nor do they even want to be transferred to anyspiritual planet. They only want Krsna's association and nothing else.Such great souls in Krsna consciousness attain the highest perfectionof life. In other words, they are the supreme souls.
TEXT 16
abrahma-bhuvanal lokah
punar avartino 'rjunamam upetya tu kaunteyapunar janma na vidyate
SYNONYMSabrahma--up to the Brahmaloka planet; bhuvanat--from the planetary
systems; lokah--planets; punah--again; avartinah--returning; arjuna--OArjuna; mam--unto Me; upetya--arriving; tu--but; kaunteya--O son ofKunti; punah janma--rebirth; na--never; vidyate--takes to.
TRANSLATIONFrom the highest planet in the material world down to the lowest, all
are places of misery wherein repeated birth and death take place. Butone who attains to My abode, O son of Kunti, never takes birth again.
PURPORTAll kinds of yogis--karma, jnana, hatha, etc.--eventually have to
attain devotional perfection in bhakti-yoga, or Krsna consciousness,before they can go to Krsna's transcendental abode and never return.Those who attain the highest material planets or the planets of thedemigods are again subjected to repeated birth and death. As persons onearth are elevated to higher planets, people in higher planets such asBrahmaloka, Candraloka and Indraloka fall down to earth. The practiceof sacrifice called pancagni-vidya, recommended in the Katha Upanisad,enables one to achieve Brahmaloka, but if, in Brahmaloka, one does notcultivate Krsna consciousness, then he must return to earth. Those whoprogress in Krsna consciousness in the higher planets are graduallyelevated to higher and higher planets and at the time of universaldevastation are transferred to the eternal spiritual kingdom. Whenthere is devastation of this material universe, Brahma and hisdevotees, who are constantly engaged in Krsna consciousness, are alltransferred to the spiritual universe and to specific spiritual planetsaccording to their desires.
TEXT 17
sahasra-yuga-paryantam
ahar yad brahmano viduhratrim yuga-sahasrantamte 'ho-ratra-vido janah
SYNONYMSsahasra--thousand; yuga--millenniums; paryantam--including; ahah--day;
yat--that; brahmanah--of Brahma; viduh--they know; ratrim--night; yuga-
-millenniums; sahasra-antam--similarly, at the end of one thousand; te-
-that; ahah-ratra--day and night; vidah--understand; janah--people.
TRANSLATIONBy human calculation, a thousand ages taken together is the duration of
Brahma's one day. And such also is the duration of his night.
PURPORTThe duration of the material universe is limited. It is manifested in
cycles of kalpas. A kalpa is a day of Brahma, and one day of Brahmaconsists of a thousand cycles of four yugas or ages: Satya, Treta,Dvapara and Kali. The cycle of Satya is characterized by virtue, wisdomand religion, there being practically no ignorance and vice, and theyuga lasts 1,728,000 years. In the Treta-yuga vice is introduced, andthis yuga lasts 1,296,000 years. In the Dvapara-yuga there is an evengreater decline in virtue and religion, vice increasing, and this yugalasts 864,000 years. And finally in Kali-yuga (the yuga that we havenow been experiencing over the past 5,000 years) there is an abundanceof strife, ignorance, irreligion and vice, true virtue beingpractically nonexistent, and this yuga lasts 432,000 years. In Kali-yuga vice increases to such a point that at the termination of the yugathe Supreme Lord Himself appears as the Kalki avatara, vanquishes thedemons, saves His devotees, and commences another Satya-yuga. Then theprocess is set rolling again. These four yugas, rotating a thousandtimes, comprise one day of Brahma, the creator god, and the same numbercomprise one night. Brahma lives one hundred of such "years" and thendies. These "hundred years" by earth calculations total to 311 trillionand 40 billion earth years. By these calculations the life of Brahmaseems fantastic and interminable, but from the viewpoint of eternity itis as brief as a lightning flash. In the Causal Ocean there areinnumerable Brahmas rising and disappearing like bubbles in theAtlantic. Brahma and his creation are all part of the materialuniverse, and therefore they are in constant flux.In the material universe not even Brahma is free from the process ofbirth, old age, disease and death. Brahma, however, is directly engagedin the service of the Supreme Lord in the management of the universe--therefore he at once attains liberation. Elevated sannyasis arepromoted to Brahma's particular planet, Brahmaloka, which is thehighest planet in the material universe and which survives all theheavenly planets in the upper strata of the planetary system, but indue course Brahma and all the inhabitants of Brahmaloka are subject todeath, according to the law of material nature.
TEXT 18
avyaktad vyaktayah sarvah
prabhavanty ahar-agameratry-agame praliyantetatraivavyakta-samjnake
SYNONYMSavyaktat--from the unmanifest; vyaktayah--living entities; sarvah--all;
prabhavanti--come into being; ahah-agame--at the beginning of the day;ratri-agame--at the fall of night; praliyante--are annihilated; tatra--there; eva--certainly; avyakta--the unmanifest; samjnake--called.
TRANSLATION
When Brahma's day is manifest, this multitude of living entities comes
into being, and at the arrival of Brahma's night they are allannihilated.
TEXT 19
bhuta-gramah sa evayam
bhutva bhutva praliyateratry-agame 'vasah parthaprabhavaty ahar-agame
SYNONYMSbhuta-gramah--the aggregate of all living entities; sah--they; eva--
certainly; ayam--this; bhutva bhutva--taking birth; praliyate--annihilate; ratri--night; agame--on arrival; avasah--automatically;partha--O son of Prtha; prabhavati--manifest; ahah--during daytime;agame--on arrival.
TRANSLATIONAgain and again the day comes, and this host of beings is active; and
again the night falls, O Partha, and they are helplessly dissolved.
PURPORTThe less intelligent jivas, who try to remain within this material
world, are accordingly elevated and degraded in the various planetarysystems. During the daytime of Brahma they exhibit their activities,and at the coming of Brahma's night they are annihilated. In the daythey receive various bodies for material activities, and at night thesebodies perish. The jivas (individual souls) remain compact in the bodyof Visnu and again and again are manifest at the arrival of Brahma'sday. When Brahma's life is finally finished, they are all annihilatedand remain unmanifest for millions and millions of years. When Brahmais born again in another millennium they are again manifest. In thisway the jivas are captivated by the material world. However, thoseintelligent beings who take to Krsna consciousness and chant HareKrsna, Hare Rama in devotional service transfer themselves, even inthis life, to the spiritual planet of Krsna and become eternallyblissful there, not being subject to such rebirths.
TEXT 20
paras tasmat tu bhavo 'nyo
'vyakto 'vyaktat sanatanahyah sa sarvesu bhutesunasyatsu na vinasyati
SYNONYMSparah--transcendental; tasmat--from that; tu--but; bhavah--nature;
anyah--another; avyaktah--unmanifest; avyaktat--from the unmanifest;sanatanah--eternal; yah--that; sah--which; sarvesu--all; bhutesu--
manifestation; nasyatsu--being annihilated; na--never; vinasyati--
annihilated.
TRANSLATIONYet there is another nature, which is eternal and is transcendental to
this manifested and unmanifested matter. It is supreme and is neverannihilated. When all in this world is annihilated, that part remainsas it is.
PURPORTKrsna's superior spiritual energy is transcendental and eternal. It is
beyond all the changes of material nature, which is manifest andannihilated during the days and nights of Brahma. Krsna's superiorenergy is completely opposite in quality to material nature. Superiorand inferior nature are explained in the Seventh Chapter.
TEXT 21
avyakto 'ksara ity uktas
tam ahuh paramam gatimyam prapya na nivartantetad dhama paramam mama
SYNONYMSavyaktah--unmanifested; aksarah--infallible; iti--thus; uktah--said;
tam--that which; ahuh--is known; paramam--ultimate; gatim--destination;yam--that which; prapya--gaining; na--never; nivartante--comes back;tat dhama--that abode; paramam--supreme; mama--Mine.
TRANSLATIONThat supreme abode is called unmanifested and infallible, and it is the
supreme destination. When one goes there, he never comes back. That isMy supreme abode.
PURPORTThe supreme abode of the Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is described in
the Brahma-samhita as cintamani-dhama, a place where all desires arefulfilled. The supreme abode of Lord Krsna known as Goloka Vrndavana isfull of palaces made of touchstone. There are also trees which arecalled "desire trees," that supply any type of eatable upon demand, andthere are cows known as surabhi cows which supply a limitless supply ofmilk. In this abode, the Lord is served by hundreds of thousands ofgoddesses of fortune (Laksmis), and He is called Govinda, the primalLord and the cause of all causes. The Lord is accustomed to blow Hisflute (venum kvanantam). His transcendental form is the most attractivein all the worlds--His eyes are like the lotus petals and the color ofHis body is like clouds. He is so attractive that His beauty excelsthat of thousands of Cupids. He wears saffron cloth, a garland aroundHis neck and a peacock feather in His hair. In the Gita Lord Krsnagives only a small hint of His personal abode (Goloka Vrndavana) whichis the supermost planet in the spiritual kingdom. A vivid descriptionis given in the Brahma-samhita. Vedic literature (Katha Upanisad1.3.11) states that there is nothing superior to the abode of the
Supreme Godhead, and that that abode is the ultimate destination
(purusan na param kincit sa kastha parama gatih). When one attains toit, he never returns to the material world. Krsna's supreme abode andKrsna Himself are nondifferent, being of the same quality. On thisearth, Vrndavana, ninety miles southeast of Delhi, is a replica of thatsupreme Goloka Vrndavana located in the spiritual sky. When Krsnadescended on this earth He sported on that particular tract of landknown as Vrndavana in the district of Mathura, India.
TEXT 22
purusah sa parah partha
bhaktya labhyas tv ananyayayasyantah-sthani bhutaniyena sarvam idam tatam
SYNONYMSpurusah--the Supreme Personality; sah--He; parah--the Supreme, than
whom no one is greater; partha--O son of Prtha; bhaktya--by devotionalservice; labhyah--can be achieved; tu--but; ananyaya--unalloyed,undeviating devotion; yasya--whom; antah-sthani--within; bhutani--allof this material manifestation; yena--by whom; sarvam--all; idam--whatever we can see; tatam--distributed.
TRANSLATIONThe Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is greater than all, is
attainable by unalloyed devotion. Although He is present in His abode,He is all-pervading, and everything is situated within Him.
PURPORTIt is here clearly stated that the supreme destination from which there
is no return is the abode of Krsna, the Supreme Person. The Brahma-samhita describes this supreme abode as ananda-cinmaya-rasa, a placewhere everything is full of spiritual bliss. Whatever variegatedness ismanifest there is all of the quality of spiritual bliss--there isnothing material. All variegatedness is expanded as the spiritualexpansion of the Supreme Godhead Himself, for the manifestation thereis totally of the spiritual energy, as explained in Chapter Seven. Asfar as this material world is concerned, although the Lord is always inHis supreme abode, He is nonetheless all-pervading by His materialenergy. So by His spiritual and material energies He is presenteverywhere--both in the material and in the spiritual universes.Yasyantah-sthani means that everything is sustained by Him, whether itbe spiritual or material energy.It is clearly stated here that only by bhakti, or devotional service,can one enter into the Vaikuntha (spiritual) planetary system. In allthe Vaikunthas there is only one Supreme Godhead, Krsna, who hasexpanded Himself into millions and millions of plenary expansions.These plenary expansions are four-armed, and They preside over theinnumerable spiritual planets. They are known by a variety of names--Purusottama, Trivikrama, Kesava, Madhava, Aniruddha, Hrsikesa,Sankarsana, Pradyumna, Sridhara, Vasudeva, Damodara, Janardana,Narayana, Vamana, Padmanabha, etc. These plenary expansions are likenedunto the leaves of a tree, and the main tree is likened to Krsna.Krsna, dwelling in Goloka Vrndavana, His supreme abode, systematically
conducts all affairs of both universes (material and spiritual) without
a flaw by power of His all-pervasiveness.
TEXT 23
yatra kale tv anavrttim
avrttim caiva yoginahprayata yanti tam kalamvaksyami bharatarsabha
SYNONYMSyatra--in that; kale--time; tu--but; anavrttim--no return; avrttim--
return; ca--also; eva--certainly; yoginah--of different kinds ofmystics; prayatah--one who goes; yanti--departs; tam--that; kalam--time; vaksyami--describing; bharatarsabha--O best of the Bharatas.
TRANSLATIONO best of the Bharatas, I shall now explain to you the different times
at which, passing away from this world, one does or does not come back.
PURPORTThe unalloyed devotees of the Supreme Lord who are totally surrendered
souls do not care when they leave their bodies or by what method. Theyleave everything in Krsna's hands and so easily and happily return toGodhead. But those who are not unalloyed devotees and who dependinstead on such methods of spiritual realization as karma-yoga, jnana-yoga, hatha-yoga, etc., must leave the body at a suitable time andthereby be assured whether or not they will return to the world ofbirth and death.If the yogi is perfect, he can select the time and place for leavingthis material world, but if he is not so perfect, then he has to leaveat nature's will. The most suitable time to leave the body and notreturn is being explained by the Lord in these verses. According toAcarya Baladeva Vidyabhusana, the Sanskrit word kala used herein refersto the presiding deity of time.
TEXT 24
agnir jyotir ahah suklah
san-masa uttarayanamtatra prayata gacchantibrahma brahma-vido janah
SYNONYMSagnih--fire; jyotih--light; ahah--day; suklah--white; sat-masah--six
months; uttara-ayanam--when the sun passes on the northern side; tatra--there; prayatah--one who goes; gacchanti--passes away; brahma--to theAbsolute; brahma-vidah--one who knows the Absolute; janah--person.
TRANSLATIONThose who know the Supreme Brahman pass away from the world during the
influence of the fiery god, in the light, at an auspicious moment,
during the fortnight of the moon and the six months when the sun
travels in the north.
PURPORTWhen fire, light, day and moon are as mentioned, it is to be understood
that over all of them there are various presiding deities who makearrangements for the passage of the soul. At the time of death, thejiva sets forth on the path to a new life. If one leaves the body atthe time designated above, either accidentally or by arrangement, it ispossible for him to attain the impersonal brahmajyoti. Mystics who areadvanced in yoga practice can arrange the time and place to leave thebody. Others have no control--if by accident they leave at anauspicious moment, then they will not return to the cycle of birth anddeath, but if not, then there is every possibility that they will haveto return. However, for the pure devotee in Krsna consciousness, thereis no fear of returning, whether he leaves the body at an auspicious orinauspicious moment, by accident or arrangement.
TEXT 25
dhumo ratris tatha krsnah
san-masa daksinayanamtatra candramasam jyotiryogi prapya nivartate
SYNONYMSdhumah--smoke; ratrih--night; tatha--also; krsnah--the fortnight of the
dark moon; sat-masah--the six months; daksina-ayanam--when the sunpasses on the southern side; tatra--there; candra-masam--the moonplanet; jyotih--light; yogi--the mystic; prapya--achieves; nivartate--comes back.
TRANSLATIONThe mystic who passes away from this world during the smoke, the night,
the moonless fortnight, or the six months when the sun passes to thesouth, or who reaches the moon planet, again comes back.
PURPORTIn the Third Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam we are informed that those who
are expert in fruitive activities and sacrificial methods on earthattain to the moon at death. These elevated souls live on the moon forabout 10,000 years (by demigod calculations) and enjoy life by drinkingsoma-rasa. They eventually return to earth. This means that on the moonthere are higher classes of living beings, though they may not beperceived by the gross senses.
TEXT 26
sukla-krsne gati hy ete
jagatah sasvate mateekaya yaty anavrttimanyayavartate punah
SYNONYMS
sukla--light; krsne--darkness; gati--passing away; hi--certainly; ete--
all these; jagatah--of the material world; sasvate--of the Vedas; mate--in the opinion; ekaya--by one; yati--goes; anavrttim--no return;anyaya--by the other; avartate--comes back; punah--again.
TRANSLATIONAccording to the Vedas, there are two ways of passing from this world--
one in the light and one in darkness. When one passes in light, he doesnot come back; but when one passes in darkness, he returns.
PURPORTThe same description of departure and return is quoted by Acarya
Baladeva Vidyabhusana from the Chandogya Upanisad (5.10.3-5). In such away, those who are fruitive laborers and philosophical speculators fromtime immemorial are constantly going and coming. Actually they do notattain ultimate salvation, for they do not surrender to Krsna.
TEXT 27
naite srti partha janan
yogi muhyati kascanatasmat sarvesu kalesuyoga-yukto bhavarjuna
SYNONYMSna--never; ete--all these; srti--different paths; partha--O son of
Prtha; janan--even if they know; yogi--the devotees of the Lord;muhyati--bewildered; kascana--anyone; tasmat--therefore; sarvesukalesu--always; yoga-yuktah--being engaged in Krsna consciousness;bhava--just become; arjuna--O Arjuna.
TRANSLATIONThe devotees who know these two paths, O Arjuna, are never bewildered.
Therefore be always fixed in devotion.
PURPORTKrsna is here advising Arjuna that he should not be disturbed by the
different paths the soul can take when leaving the material world. Adevotee of the Supreme Lord should not worry whether he will departeither by arrangement or by accident. The devotee should be firmlyestablished in Krsna consciousness and chant Hare Krsna. He should knowthat concern over either of these two paths is troublesome. The bestway to be absorbed in Krsna consciousness is to be always dovetailed inHis service, and that will make one's path to the spiritual kingdomsafe, certain, and direct. The word yoga-yukta is especiallysignificant in this verse. One who is firm in yoga is constantlyengaged in Krsna consciousness in all his activities. Sri Rupa Gosvamiadvises that one should be unattached in the material world and thatall affairs should be steeped in Krsna consciousness. In this way oneattains perfection. Therefore the devotee is not disturbed by thesedescriptions because he knows that his passage to the supreme abode isguaranteed by devotional service.
TEXT 28
vedesu yajnesu tapahsu caiva
danesu yat punya-phalam pradistamatyeti tat sarvam idam viditvayogi param sthanam upaiti cadyam
SYNONYMSvedesu--in the study of the Vedas; yajnesu--in the performances of
yajna, sacrifice; tapahsu--undergoing different types of austerities;ca--also; eva--certainly; danesu--in giving charities; yat--that which;punya-phalam--the result of pious work; pradistam--directed; atyeti--surpasses; tat--all those; sarvam idam--all those described above;viditva--knowing; yogi--the devotee; param--supreme; sthanam--abode;upaiti--achieved peace; ca--also; adyam--original.
TRANSLATIONA person who accepts the path of devotional service is not bereft of
the results derived from studying the Vedas, performing austeresacrifices, giving charity or pursuing philosophical and fruitiveactivities. At the end he reaches the supreme abode.
PURPORTThis verse is the summation of the Seventh and Eighth chapters,
particularly as the chapters deal with Krsna consciousness anddevotional service. One has to study the Vedas under the guidance ofthe spiritual master and undergo many austerities and penances whileliving under his care. A brahmacari has to live in the home of thespiritual master just like a servant, and he must beg alms from door todoor and bring them to the spiritual master. He takes food only underthe master's order, and if the master neglects to call the student forfood that day, the student fasts. These are some of the Vedicprinciples for observing brahmacarya.After the student studies the Vedas under the master for a period fromfive to twenty years, he may become a man of perfect character. Studyof the Vedas is not meant for the recreation of armchair speculators,but for the formation of character. After this training, the brahmacariis allowed to enter into household life and marry. When he is ahouseholder, he also has to perform many sacrifices and strive forfurther enlightenment. Then after retiring from household life, uponaccepting the order of vanaprastha, he undergoes severe penances, suchas living in forests, dressing with tree bark, not shaving, etc. Bycarrying out the orders of brahmacarya, householder, vanaprastha andfinally sannyasa, one becomes elevated to the perfectional stage oflife. Some are then elevated to the heavenly kingdoms, and when theybecome even more advanced they are liberated in the spiritual sky,either in the impersonal brahmajyoti or in the Vaikuntha planets orKrsnaloka. This is the path outlined by Vedic literatures.The beauty of Krsna consciousness, however, is that by one stroke, byengaging in devotional service, one can surpass all rituals of thedifferent orders of life.One should try to understand the Seventh and Eighth Chapters of theGita not by scholarship or mental speculation, but by hearing them inassociation with pure devotees. Chapters Seven through Twelve are the
essence of Gita, if one is fortunate to understand the Gita--especially
these middle six chapters--in the association of devotees, then hislife at once becomes glorified beyond all penances, sacrifices,charities, speculations, etc. One should hear the Gita from the devoteebecause at the beginning of the Fourth Chapter it is stated that theGita can only be perfectly understood by devotees. Hearing the Gitafrom devotees, not from mental speculators, is called faith. Throughassociation of devotees, one is placed in devotional service, and bythis service Krsna's activities, form, pastimes, name, etc., becomeclear, and all misgivings are dispelled. Then once doubts are removed,the study of the Gita becomes extremely pleasurable, and one develops ataste and feeling for Krsna consciousness. In the advanced stage, onefalls completely in love with Krsna, and that is the beginning of thehighest perfectional stage of life which prepares the devotee'stransferral to Krsna's abode in the spiritual sky, Goloka Vrndavana,where the devotee enters into eternal happiness.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Eighth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Attaining the Supreme.
Chapter 9
The Most Confidential Knowledge
TEXT 1
sri-bhagavan uvaca
idam tu te guhyatamampravaksyamy anasuyavejnanam vijnana-sahitamyaj jnatva moksyase 'subhat
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; idam--
this; tu--but; te--unto you; guhya-tamam--the most confidential;pravaksyami--I am speaking; anasuyave--to the nonenvious; jnanam--knowledge; vijnana--realized knowledge; sahitam--with; yat--which;jnatva--knowing; moksyase--be released; asubhat--from this miserablematerial existence.
TRANSLATIONThe Supreme Lord said: My dear Arjuna, because you are never envious of
Me, I shall impart to you this most secret wisdom, knowing which youshall be relieved of the miseries of material existence.
PURPORTAs a devotee hears more and more about the Supreme Lord, he becomes
enlightened. This hearing process is recommended in the Srimad-Bhagavatam: "The messages of the Supreme Personality of Godhead arefull of potencies, and these potencies can be realized if topicsregarding the Supreme Godhead are discussed amongst devotees. Thiscannot be achieved by the association of mental speculators or academicscholars, for it is realized knowledge."The devotees are constantly engaged in the Supreme Lord's service. TheLord understands the mentality and sincerity of a particular livingentity who is engaged in Krsna consciousness and gives him the
intelligence to understand the science of Krsna in the association of
the devotees. Discussion of Krsna is very potent, and if a fortunateperson has such association and tries to assimilate the knowledge, thenhe will surely make advancement toward spiritual realization. LordKrsna, in order to encourage Arjuna to higher and higher elevation inHis potent service, describes in this Ninth Chapter matters moreconfidential than any He has already disclosed.The very beginning of Bhagavad-gita, the First Chapter, is more or lessan introduction to the rest of the book; and in the Second and Thirdchapters, the spiritual knowledge described is called confidential.Topics discussed in the Seventh and Eighth chapters are specificallyrelated to devotional service, and because they bring enlightenment inKrsna consciousness, they are called more confidential. But the matterswhich are described in the Ninth Chapter deal with unalloyed, puredevotion. Therefore this is called the most confidential. One who issituated in the most confidential knowledge of Krsna is naturallytranscendental; he therefore has no material pangs, although he is inthe material world. In the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu it is said thatalthough one who has a sincere desire to render loving service to theSupreme Lord is situated in the conditional state of materialexistence, he is to be considered liberated. Similarly, we shall findin the Bhagavad-gita, Tenth Chapter, that anyone who is engaged in thatway is a liberated person.Now this first verse has specific significance. Knowledge (idam jnanam)refers to pure devotional service, which consists of nine differentactivities: hearing, chanting, remembering, serving, worshiping,praying, obeying, maintaining friendship and surrendering everything.By the practice of these nine elements of devotional service one iselevated to spiritual consciousness, Krsna consciousness. At the timewhen one's heart is cleared of the material contamination, one canunderstand this science of Krsna. Simply to understand that a livingentity is not material is not sufficient. That may be the beginning ofspiritual realization but one should recognize the difference betweenactivities of the body and spiritual activities by which oneunderstands that he is not the body.In the Seventh Chapter we have already discussed the opulent potency ofthe Supreme Personality of Godhead, His different energies, theinferior and superior natures, and all this material manifestation. Nowin Chapters Nine and Ten the glories of the Lord will be delineated.The Sanskrit word anasuyave in this verse is also very significant.Generally the commentators, even if they are highly scholarly, are allenvious of Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Even the mosterudite scholars write on Bhagavad-gita very inaccurately. Because theyare envious of Krsna, their commentaries are useless. The commentariesgiven by devotees of the Lord are bona fide. No one can explainBhagavad-gita, or give perfect knowledge of Krsna if he is envious. Onewho criticizes the character of Krsna without knowing Him is a fool. Sosuch commentaries should be very carefully avoided. For one whounderstands that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the pureand transcendental Personality, these chapters will be very beneficial.
TEXT 2
raja-vidya raja-guhyam
pavitram idam uttamampratyaksavagamam dharmyamsu-sukham kartum avyayam
SYNONYMS
raja-vidya--the king of education; raja-guhyam--the king of
confidential knowledge; pavitram--the purest; idam--this; uttamam--transcendental; pratyaksa--directly experienced; avagamam--understood;dharmyam--the principle of religion; su-sukham--very happy; kartum--toexecute; avyayam--everlasting.
TRANSLATIONThis knowledge is the king of education, the most secret of all
secrets. It is the purest knowledge, and because it gives directperception of the self by realization, it is the perfection ofreligion. It is everlasting, and it is joyfully performed.
PURPORTThis chapter of Bhagavad-gita is called the king of education because
it is the essence of all doctrines and philosophies explained before.There are seven principal philosophers in India, Gautama, Kanada,Kapila, Yajnavalkya, Sandilya, Vaisvanara, and, finally, Vyasadeva, theauthor of the Vedanta-sutra. So there is no dearth of knowledge in thefield of philosophy or transcendental knowledge. Now the Lord says thatthis Ninth Chapter is the king of all such knowledge, the essence ofall knowledge that can be derived from the study of the Vedas anddifferent kinds of philosophy. It is the most confidential becauseconfidential or transcendental knowledge involves understanding thedifference between the soul and the body. And the king of allconfidential knowledge culminates in devotional service.Generally, people are not educated in this confidential knowledge; theyare educated in external knowledge. As far as ordinary education isconcerned, people are involved with so many departments: politics,sociology, physics, chemistry, mathematics, astronomy, engineering,etc. There are so many departments of knowledge all over the world andmany huge universities, but there is, unfortunately, no university oreducational institution where the science of the spirit soul isinstructed. Yet the soul is the most important part of this body;without the presence of the soul, the body has no value. Still peopleare placing great stress on the bodily necessities of life, not caringfor the vital soul.The Bhagavad-gita, especially from the Second Chapter on, stresses theimportance of the soul. In the very beginning, the Lord says that thisbody is perishable and that the soul is not perishable. That is aconfidential part of knowledge: simply knowing that the spirit soul isdifferent from this body and that its nature is immutable,indestructible and eternal. But that gives no positive informationabout the soul. Sometimes people are under the impression that the soulis different from the body and that when the body is finished, or oneis liberated from the body, the soul remains in a void and becomesimpersonal. But actually that is not the fact. How can the soul, whichis so active within this body, be inactive after being liberated fromthe body? It is always active. If it is eternal, then it is eternallyactive, and its activities in the spiritual kingdom are the mostconfidential part of spiritual knowledge. These activities of thespirit soul are therefore indicated here as constituting the king ofall knowledge, the most confidential part of all knowledge.
This knowledge is the purest form of all activities, as is explained in
Vedic literature. In the Padma Purana, man's sinful activities havebeen analyzed and are shown to be the results of sin after sin. Thosewho are engaged in fruitive activities are entangled in differentstages and forms of sinful reactions. For instance, when the seed of aparticular tree is sown, the tree does not appear immediately to grow;it takes some time. It is first a small, sprouting plant, then itassumes the form of a tree, then it flowers, bears fruit, and, when itis complete, the flowers and fruits are enjoyed by persons who havesown the seed of the tree. Similarly, a man performs a sinful act, andlike a seed it takes time to fructify. There are different stages. Thesinful action may have already stopped within the individual, but theresults or the fruit of that sinful action are still enjoyed. There aresins which are still in the form of a seed, and there are others whichare already fructified and are giving us fruit, which we are enjoyingas distress and painAs explained in the twenty-eighth verse of the Seventh Chapter, aperson who has completely ended the reactions of all sinful activitiesand who is fully engaged in pious activities, being freed from theduality of this material world, becomes engaged in devotional serviceto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. In other words, those whoare actually engaged in the devotional service of the Supreme Lord arealready freed from all reactions. For those who are engaged in thedevotional service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, all sinfulreactions, whether fructified, in the stock, or in the form of a seed,gradually vanish. Therefore the purifying potency of devotional serviceis very strong, and it is called pavitram uttamam, the purest. Uttamameans transcendental. Tamas means this material world or darkness, anduttama means that which is transcendental to material activities.Devotional activities are never to be considered material, althoughsometimes it appears that devotees are engaged just like ordinary men.One who can see and is familiar with devotional service, however, willknow that they are not material activities. They are all spiritual anddevotional, uncontaminated by the material modes of nature.It is said that the execution of devotional service is so perfect thatone can perceive the results directly. This direct result is actuallyperceived, and we have practical experience that any person who ischanting the holy names of Krsna (Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna,Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare) in course oftime feels some transcendental pleasure and very quickly becomespurified of all material contamination. This is actually seen.Furthermore, if one engages not only in hearing but in trying tobroadcast the message of devotional activities as well, or if heengages himself in helping the missionary activities of Krsnaconsciousness, he gradually feels spiritual progress. This advancementin spiritual life does not depend on any kind of previous education orqualification. The method itself is so pure that by simply engaging init one becomes pure.In the Vedanta-sutra (3.2.26) this is also described in the followingwords: prakasas ca karmany abhyasat. "Devotional service is so potentthat simply by engaging in the activities of devotional service onebecomes enlightened without a doubt." Narada, who happened to be theson of a maidservant, had no education, nor was he born into a highfamily. But when his mother was engaged in serving great devotees,Narada also became engaged, and sometimes, in the absence of hismother, he would serve the great devotees himself. Narada personallysays, "Once only, by their permission, I took the remnants of theirfood, and by so doing all my sins were at once eradicated. Thus being
engaged, I became purified in heart, and at that time the very nature
of the transcendentalist became attractive to me."(Bhag 1.5.25) Naradatells his disciple Vyasadeva that in a previous life he was engaged asa boy servant of purified devotees during the four months of their stayand that he was intimately associating with them. Sometimes those sagesleft remnants of food on their dishes, and the boy, who would washtheir dishes, wanted to taste the remnants. So he asked the greatdevotees whether he could eat them, and they gave their permission.Narada then ate those remnants and consequently became freed from allsinful reactions. As he went on eating, he gradually became as pure-hearted as the sages, and he gradually developed the same taste. Thegreat devotees relished the taste of unceasing devotional service ofthe Lord, hearing, chanting, etc., and by developing the same taste,Narada wanted also to hear and chant the glories of the Lord. Thus byassociating with the sages, he developed a great desire for devotionalservice. Therefore, he quotes from the Vedanta-sutra (prakasas cakarmany abhyasat): if one is engaged simply in the acts of devotionalservice, everything is revealed to him automatically, and he canunderstand. This is called pratyaksa, directly perceived.Narada was actually a son of a maidservant. He had no opportunity to goto school. He was simply assisting his mother, and fortunately hismother rendered some service to the devotees. The child Narada also gotthe opportunity and simply by association achieved the highest goal ofall religions, devotional service. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is saidthat religious people generally do not know that the highest perfectionof religion is the attainment of the stage of devotional service.Generally Vedic knowledge is required for understanding the path ofself-realization. But here, although he was not educated in the Vedicprinciples, Narada acquired the highest results of Vedic study. Thisprocess is so potent that even without performing the religious processregularly, one can be raised to the highest perfection. How is thispossible? This is also confirmed in Vedic literature: acaryavan purusoveda. One who is in association with great acaryas, even if he is noteducated or has not studied the Vedas, can become familiar with all theknowledge necessary for realization.The process of devotional service is a very happy one. Why? Devotionalservice consists of sravanam kirtanam visnoh, so one can simply hearthe chanting of the glories of the Lord or can attend philosophicallectures on transcendental knowledge given by authorized acaryas.Simply by sitting, one can learn; then one can eat the remnants of thefood offered to God, nice palatable dishes. In every state devotionalservice is joyful. One can execute devotional service even in the mostpoverty-stricken condition. The Lord says, patram puspam phalam: He isready to accept from the devotee any kind of offering, never mind what.Even a leaf, a flower, a bit of fruit, or a little water, which areavailable in every part of the world, can be offered by any person,regardless of social position, and will be accepted if offered withlove. There are many instances in history. Simply by tasting the tulasileaves offered to the lotus feet of the Lord, great sages like Sanat-kumara became great devotees. Therefore the devotional process is verynice, and it can be executed in a happy mood. God accepts only the lovewith which things are offered to Him.It is said here that this devotional service is eternally existing. Itis not as the Mayavadi philosophers claim. They sometimes take to so-called devotional service, and as long as they are not liberated theycontinue their devotional service, but at the end, when they becomeliberated, they "become one with God." Such temporary time-servingdevotional service is not accepted as pure devotional service. Actual
devotional service continues even after liberation. When the devotee
goes to the spiritual planet in the kingdom of God, he is also engagedthere in serving the Supreme Lord. He does not try to become one withthe Supreme Lord.As it will be seen, actual devotional service begins after liberation.So in Bhagavad-gita it is said, brahma-bhuta, After being liberated, orbeing situated in the Brahman position, one's devotional servicebegins. By executing devotional service, one can understand the SupremeLord. No one can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead byexecuting karma-yoga, jnana or astanga-yoga or any other yogaindependently. Without coming to the stage of devotional service, onecannot understand what is the Personality of Godhead. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is also confirmed that when one becomes purified byexecuting the process of devotional service, especially by hearingSrimad-Bhagavatam or Bhagavad-gita from realized souls, then he canunderstand the science of Krsna, or the science of God. Evam prasanna-manaso bhagavad-bhakti yogatah. When one's heart is cleared of allnonsense, then one can understand what God is. Thus the process ofdevotional service, of Krsna consciousness, is the king of alleducation and the king of all confidential knowledge. It is the purestform of religion, and it can be executed joyfully without difficulty.Therefore one should adopt it.
TEXT 3
asraddadhanah purusa
dharmasyasya parantapaaprapya mam nivartantemrtyu-samsara-vartmani
SYNONYMSasraddadhanah--those who are faithless; purusah--such persons;
dharmasya--of this process of religion; asya--of it; parantapa--Okiller of the enemies; aprapya--without obtaining; mam--Me; nivartante--come back; mrtyu--death; samsara--material existence; vartmani--on thepath of.
TRANSLATIONThose who are not faithful on the path of devotional service cannot
attain Me, O conqueror of foes, but return to birth and death in thismaterial world.
PURPORTThe faithless cannot accomplish this process of devotional service;
that is the purport of this verse. Faith is created by association withdevotees. Unfortunate people, even after hearing all the evidence ofVedic literature from great personalities, still have no faith in God.They are hesitant and cannot stay fixed in the devotional service ofthe Lord. Thus faith is a most important factor for progress in Krsnaconsciousness. In the Caitanya-caritamrta it is said that one shouldhave complete conviction that simply by serving the Supreme Lord SriKrsna he can achieve all perfection. That is called real faith. In theSrimad-Bhagavatam (4.31.14) it is stated that by giving water to theroot of a tree, its branches, twigs and leaves become satisfied, and bysupplying food to the stomach all the senses of the body become
satisfied, and, similarly, by engaging in the transcendental service of
the Supreme Lord, all the demigods and all the living entitiesautomatically become satisfied.There are three divisions of Krsna conscious men. In the third classare those who have no faith. If they are engaged in devotional serviceofficially, for some ulterior purpose, they cannot achieve the highestperfectional stage. Most probably they will slip, after some time. Theymay become engaged, but because they haven't complete conviction andfaith, it is very difficult for them to continue in Krsnaconsciousness. We have practical experience in discharging ourmissionary activity that some people come and apply themselves to Krsnaconsciousness with some hidden motive, and as soon as they areeconomically a little well situated they give up this process and taketo their old ways again. It is only by faith that one can advance inKrsna consciousness. As far as the development of faith is concerned,one who is well versed in the literatures of devotional service and hasattained the stage of firm faith is called a first-class person inKrsna consciousness. And in the second-class are those who are not veryadvanced in understanding the devotional scriptures but whoautomatically have firm faith that krsna-bhakti or service to Krsna isthe best course and so in good faith have taken it up. Thus they aresuperior to the third-class who have neither perfect knowledge of thescriptures nor good faith but by association and simplicity are tryingto follow. The third-class person in Krsna consciousness may fall down,but when one is in the second-class or first-class he does not falldown. One in the first-class will surely make progress and achieve theresult at the end. As far as the third-class person in Krsnaconsciousness is concerned, although he has faith in the convictionthat devotional service to Krsna is very good, he has no knowledge ofKrsna through the scriptures like Srimad-Bhagavatam and Bhagavad-gita.Sometimes these third-class persons in Krsna consciousness have sometendency toward karma-yoga and jnana-yoga, and sometimes they aredisturbed, but as soon as the infection of karma-yoga or jnana-yoga isvanquished, they become second-class or first-class persons in Krsnaconsciousness. Faith in Krsna is also divided into three stages anddescribed in Srimad-Bhagavatam. First-class attachment, second-classattachment, and third-class attachment are also explained in Srimad-Bhagavatam in the Eleventh Canto. Those who have no faith even afterhearing about Krsna and the excellence of devotional service, who thinkthat it is simply eulogy, find the path very difficult, even if theyare supposedly engaged in devotional service. For them there is verylittle hope in gaining perfection. Thus faith is very important in thedischarge of devotional service.
TEXT 4
maya tatam idam sarvam
jagad avyakta-murtinamat-sthani sarva-bhutanina caham tesv avasthitah
SYNONYMSmaya--by Me; tatam--spread; idam--all these manifestations; sarvam--
all; jagat--cosmic manifestation; avyakta-murtina--unmanifested form;mat-sthani--unto Me; sarva-bhutani--all living entities; na--not; ca--also; aham--I; tesu--in them; avasthitah--situated.
TRANSLATION
By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All
beings are in Me, but I am not in them.
PURPORTThe Supreme Personality of Godhead is not perceivable through the gross
material senses. It is said that Lord Sri Krsna's name, fame, pastimes,etc., cannot be understood by material senses. Only to one who isengaged in pure devotional service under proper guidance is Herevealed. In the Brahma-samhita (5.38) it is stated, premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti: one cansee the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda, always within himselfand outside himself if he has developed the transcendental lovingattitude towards Him. Thus for people in general He is not visible.Here it is said that although He is all-pervading, everywhere present,He is yet not conceivable by the material senses. But actually,although we cannot see Him, everything is resting in Him. As we havediscussed in the Seventh Chapter, the entire material cosmicmanifestation is only a combination of His two different energies, thesuperior spiritual energy and the inferior material energy. Just as thesunshine is spread all over the universe, the energy of the Lord isspread all over the creation, and everything is resting in that energy.Yet one should not conclude that because He is spread all over He haslost His personal existence. To refute such an argument the Lord says,"I am everywhere, and everything is in Me, but still I am aloof." Forexample, a king heads a government which is but the manifestation ofthe king's energy; the different governmental departments are nothingbut the energies of the king, and each department is resting on theking's power. But still one cannot expect the king to be present inevery department personally. That is a crude example. Similarly, allthe manifestations that we see, and everything that exists both in thismaterial world and in the spiritual world, are resting on the energy ofthe Supreme Personality of Godhead. The creation takes place by thediffusion of His different energies, and, as it is stated in theBhagavad-gita, He is everywhere present by His personal representation,the diffusion of His different energies.
TEXT 5
na ca mat-sthani bhutani
pasya me yogam aisvarambhuta-bhrn na ca bhuta-sthomamatma bhuta-bhavanah
SYNONYMSna--never; ca--also; mat-sthani--situated in Me; bhutani--all creation;
pasya--just see; me--My; yogam aisvaram--inconceivable mystic power;bhuta-bhrt--maintainer of all living entities; na--never; ca--also;bhuta-sthah--in the cosmic manifestation; mama--My; atma--Self; bhuta-bhavanah--is the source of all manifestations.
TRANSLATIONAnd yet everything that is created does not rest in Me. Behold My
mystic opulence! Although I am the maintainer of all living entities,
and although I am everywhere, still My Self is the very source of
creation.
PURPORTThe Lord says that everything is resting on Him. This should not be
misunderstood. The Lord is not directly concerned with the maintenanceand sustenance of this material manifestation. Sometimes we see apicture of Atlas holding the globe on his shoulders; he seems to bevery tired, holding this great earthly planet. Such an image should notbe entertained in connection with Krsna's upholding this createduniverse. He says that although everything is resting on Him, still Heis aloof. The planetary systems are floating in space, and this spaceis the energy of the Supreme Lord. But He is different from space. Heis differently situated. Therefore the Lord says, "Although they aresituated on My inconceivable energy, still, as the Supreme Personalityof Godhead, I am aloof from them." This is the inconceivable opulenceof the Lord.In the Vedic dictionary it is said, "The Supreme Lord is performinginconceivably wonderful pastimes, displaying His energy. His person isfull of different potent energies, and His determination is itselfactual fact. In this way the Personality of Godhead is to beunderstood." We may think to doing something, but there are so manyimpediments, and sometimes it is not possible to do as we like. Butwhen Krsna wants to do something, simply by His willing, everything isperformed so perfectly that one cannot imagine how it is being done.The Lord explains this fact: although He is the maintainer andsustainer of the entire material manifestation, He does not touch thismaterial manifestation. Simply by His supreme will everything iscreated, everything is sustained, everything is maintained, andeverything is annihilated. There is no difference between His mind andHimself (as there is a difference between ourselves and our presentmaterial mind) because He is absolute spirit. Simultaneously the Lordis present in everything; yet the common man cannot understand how Heis also present personally. He is different from this materialmanifestation, yet everything is resting on Him. This is explained hereas yogam aisvaram, the mystic power of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead.
TEXT 6
yathakasa-sthito nityam
vayuh sarvatra-go mahantatha sarvani bhutanimat-sthanity upadharaya
SYNONYMSyatha--as much as; akasa-sthitah--situated in space; nityam--always;
vayuh--wind; sarvatra-gah--blowing everywhere; mahan--great; tatha--similarly; sarvani--everything; bhutani--created beings; mat-sthani--situated in Me; iti--thus; upadharaya--try to understand.
TRANSLATIONAs the mighty wind, blowing everywhere, always rests in ethereal space,
know that in the same manner all beings rest in Me.
PURPORT
For the ordinary person it is almost inconceivable how the huge
material creation is resting in Him. But the Lord is giving an examplewhich may help us to understand. Space is the biggest manifestation wecan conceive. The cosmic manifestation rests in space. Space permitsthe movement of even the atoms and on up to the greatest planets, theSun and the Moon. Although the sky (or wind or air) is great, still itis situated within space. Space is not beyond the sky.In the Upanisads, it is stated, "It is out of the fear of the SupremeLord that the wind is blowing." (Taittiriya Upanisad 2.8.1) In theBrhad-aranyaka Upanisad (3.8.9) it is stated, "By the supreme order,under the superintendence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, themoon, the sun, and other great planets are moving." In the Brahma-samhita (5.52) this is also stated. There is also a description of themovement of the sun, and it is said that the sun is considered to beone of the eyes of the Supreme Lord and that it has immense potency todiffuse heat and light. Still it is moving in its prescribed orbit bythe order and the supreme will of Govinda. So, from the Vedicliterature we can find evidence that this material manifestation, whichappears to us to be very wonderful and great, is under the completecontrol of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This will be furtherexplained in the later verses of this chapter.
TEXT 7
sarva-bhutani kaunteya
prakrtim yanti mamikamkalpa-ksaye punas tanikalpadau visrjamy aham
SYNONYMSsarva-bhutani--all created entities; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
prakrtim--nature; yanti--enter; mamikam--unto Me; kalpa-ksaye--at theend of the millennium; punah--again; tani--all those; kalpa-adau--inthe beginning of the millennium; visrjami--I create; aham--I.
TRANSLATIONO son of Kunti at the end of the millennium every material
manifestation enters into My nature, and at the beginning of anothermillennium, by My potency, I again create.
PURPORTThe creation, maintenance and annihilation of this material cosmic
manifestation is completely dependent on the supreme will of thePersonality of Godhead. "At the end of the millennium" means at thedeath of Brahma. Brahma lives for one hundred years, and his one day iscalculated at 4,300,000,000 of our earthly years. His night is of thesame duration. His month consists of thirty such days and nights, andhis year of twelve months. After one hundred such years, when Brahmadies, the devastation or annihilation takes place; this means that theenergy manifested by the Supreme Lord is again wound up in Himself.Then again, when there is need to manifest the cosmic world, it is doneby His will: "Although I am one, I shall become many." This is the
Vedic aphorism (Chandogya Upanisad 6.2.3). He expands Himself in this
material energy, and the whole cosmic manifestation again takes place.
TEXT 8
prakrtim svam avastabhya
visrjami punah punahbhuta-gramam imam krtsnamavasam prakrter vasat
SYNONYMSprakrtim--material nature; svam--of My personal Self; avastabhya--enter
in; visrjami--create; punah punah--again, again; bhuta-gramam--allthese cosmic manifestations; imam--this; krtsnam--total; avasam--automatically; prakrteh--by the force of nature; vasat--underobligation.
TRANSLATIONThe whole cosmic order is under Me. By My will it is manifested again
and again, and by My will it is annihilated at the end.
PURPORTThis matter is the manifestation of the inferior energy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. This has already been explained several times.At the creation, the material energy is let loose as the mahat-tattva,into which the Lord as His first Purusa incarnation, Maha-Visnu,enters. He lies within the Causal Ocean and breathes out innumerableuniverses, and into each universe the Lord again enters asGarbhodakasayi Visnu. Each universe is in that way created. He stillfurther manifests Himself as Ksirodakasayi Visnu, and that Visnu entersinto everything--even into the minute atom. This fact is explainedhere. He enters into everything.Now, as far as the living entities are concerned, they are impregnatedinto this material nature, and as a result of their past deeds theytake different positions. Thus the activities of this material worldbegin. The activities of the different species of living beings arebegun from the very moment of the creation. It is not that all isevolved. The different species of life are created immediately alongwith the universe. Men, animals, beasts, birds--everything issimultaneously created, because whatever desires the living entitieshad at the last annihilation are again manifested. It is clearly statedhere that the living entities have nothing to do with this process. Thestate of being in their past life in the past creation is simplymanifested again, and all this is done simply by His will. This is theinconceivable potency of the Supreme Personality of God. And aftercreating different species of life, He has no connection with them. Thecreation takes place to accommodate the inclinations of the variousliving entities, and so the Lord does not become involved with it.
TEXT 9
na ca mam tani karmani
nibadhnanti dhananjayaudasina-vad asinamasaktam tesu karmasu
SYNONYMS
na--never; ca--also; mam--Me; tani--all those; karmani--activities;
nibadhnanti--bind; dhananjaya--O conqueror of riches; udasina-vat--asneutral; asinam--situated; asaktam--without attraction; tesu--in them;karmasu--in activities.
TRANSLATIONO Dhananjaya, all this work cannot bind Me. I am ever detached, seated
as though neutral.
PURPORTOne should not think, in this connection, that the Supreme Personality
of Godhead has no engagement. In His spiritual world He is alwaysengaged. In the Brahma-samhita (5.6) it is stated, "He is alwaysinvolved in His eternal, blissful, spiritual activities, but He hasnothing to do with these material activities." Material activities arebeing carried on by His different potencies. The Lord is always neutralin the material activities of the created world. This neutrality isexplained here. Although He has control over every minute detail ofmatter, He is sitting as if neutral. The example can be given of a highcourt judge sitting on his bench. By his order so many things arehappening: someone is being hanged, someone is being put into jail,someone is awarded a huge amount of wealth--but still he is neutral. Hehas nothing to do with all that gain and loss. Similarly, the Lord isalways neutral, although He has His hand in every sphere of activity.In the Vedanta-sutra (2.1.34) it is stated that He is not situated inthe dualities of this material world. He is transcendental to thesedualities. Nor is He attached to the creation and annihilation of thismaterial world. The living entities take their different forms in thevarious species of life according to their past deeds, and the Lorddoesn't interfere with them.
TEXT 10
mayadhyaksena prakrtih
suyate sa-caracaramhetunanena kaunteyajagad viparivartate
SYNONYMSmaya--by Me; adhyaksena--by superintendence; prakrtih--material nature;
suyate--manifests; sa--with; cara-acaram--the moving and the nonmoving;hetuna--for this reason; anena--this; kaunteya--O son of Kunti; jagat--the cosmic manifestation; viparivartate--is working.
TRANSLATIONThis material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kunti, and
it is producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule thismanifestation is created and annihilated again and again.
PURPORT
It is clearly stated here that the Supreme Lord, although aloof from
all the activities of the material world, remains the supreme director.The Supreme Lord is the supreme will and the background of thismaterial manifestation, but the management is being conducted bymaterial nature. Krsna also states in Bhagavad-gita that of all of theliving entities in different forms and species, "I am the father." Thefather gives seeds to the womb of the mother for the child, andsimilarly the Supreme Lord by His mere glance injects all the livingentities into the womb of material nature, and they come out in theirdifferent forms and species, according to their last desires andactivities. All these living entities, although born under the glanceof the Supreme Lord, still take their different bodies according totheir past deeds and desires. So the Lord is not directly attached tothis material creation. He simply glances over material nature;material nature is thus activated, and everything is createdimmediately. Because He glances over material nature, there isundoubtedly activity on the part of the Supreme Lord, but He hasnothing to do with the manifestation of the material world directly.This example is given in the smrti: when there is a fragrant flowerbefore someone, the fragrance is touched by the smelling power of theperson, yet the smelling and the flower are detached from one another.There is a similar connection between the material world and theSupreme Personality of Godhead; actually He has nothing to do with thismaterial world, but He creates by His glance and ordains. In summary,material nature, without the superintendence of the Supreme Personalityof Godhead, cannot do anything. Yet the Supreme Personality is detachedfrom all material activities.
TEXT 11
avajananti mam mudha
manusim tanum asritamparam bhavam ajanantomama bhuta-mahesvaram
SYNONYMSavajananti--deride; mam--Me; mudhah--foolish men; manusim--in human
form; tanum--body; asritam--assuming; param--transcendental; bhavam--nature; ajanantah--not knowing; mama--Mine; bhuta--everything that be;maha-isvaram--the supreme proprietor.
TRANSLATIONFools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They do not know My
transcendental nature and My supreme dominion over all that be.
PURPORTFrom the other explanations of the previous verses in this chapter, it
is clear that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although appearinglike a human being, is not a common man. The Personality of Godhead,who conducts the creation, maintenance and annihilation of the completecosmic manifestation, cannot be a human being. Yet there are manyfoolish men who consider Krsna to be merely a powerful man and nothingmore. Actually, He is the original Supreme Personality, as is confirmedin the Brahma-samhita (isvarah paramah krsnah); He is the Supreme Lord.
There are many isvaras, controllers, and one appears greater than
another. In the ordinary management of affairs in the material world,we find some official or director, and above him there is a secretary,and above him a minister, and above him a president. Each of them is acontroller, but one is controlled by another. In the Brahma-samhita itis said that Krsna is the supreme controller; there are manycontrollers undoubtedly, both in the material and spiritual world, butKrsna is the supreme controller (isvarah paramah krsnah) and His bodyis sac-cid-ananda, nonmaterial.Material bodies cannot perform the wonderful acts described in previousverses. His body is eternal, blissful and full of knowledge. AlthoughHe is not a common man, the foolish deride Him and consider Him to be aman. His body is called here manusim because He is acting just like aman, a friend of Arjuna's, a politician involved in the Battle ofKuruksetra. In so many ways He is acting just like an ordinary man, butactually His body is sac-cid-ananda-vigraha--eternal bliss andknowledge absolute. This is confirmed in the Vedic language also. Sac-cid-ananda-rupaya krsnaya: "I offer my obeisances unto the SupremePersonality of Godhead, Krsna, who is the eternal blissful form ofknowledge." (Gopala-tapani Upanisad 1.1) There are other descriptionsin the Vedic language also. Tam ekam govindam: "You are Govinda, thepleasure of the senses and the cows." Sac-cid-ananda-vigraham: "AndYour form is transcendental, full of knowledge, bliss and eternality."(Gopala-tapani Upanisad 1.35)Despite the transcendental qualities of Lord Krsna's body, its fullbliss and knowledge, there are many so-called scholars and commentatorsof Bhagavad-gita who deride Krsna as an ordinary man. The scholar maybe born an extraordinary man due to his previous good work, but thisconception of Sri Krsna is due to a poor fund of knowledge. Thereforehe is called mudha, for only foolish persons consider Krsna to be anordinary human being because they do not know the confidentialactivities of the Supreme Lord and His different energies. They do notknow that Krsna's body is a symbol of complete knowledge and bliss,that He is the proprietor of everything that be and that He can awardliberation to anyone. Because they do not know that Krsna has so manytranscendental qualifications, they deride Him.Nor do they know that the appearance of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead in this material world is a manifestation of His internalenergy. He is the master of the material energy. As has been explainedin several places (mama maya duratyaya), He claims that the materialenergy, although very powerful, is under His control, and whoeversurrenders unto Him can get out of the control of this material energy.If a soul surrendered to Krsna can get out of the influence of materialenergy, then how can the Supreme Lord, who conducts the creation,maintenance and annihilation of the whole cosmic nature, have amaterial body like us? So this conception of Krsna is completefoolishness. Foolish persons, however, cannot conceive that thePersonality of Godhead, Krsna, appearing just like an ordinary man, canbe the controller of all the atoms and of the gigantic manifestation ofthe universal form. The biggest and the minutest are beyond theirconception, so they cannot imagine that a form like that of a humanbeing can simultaneously control the infinite and the minute. Actuallyalthough He is controlling the infinite and the finite, He is apartfrom all this manifestation. It is clearly stated concerning His yogamaisvaram, His inconceivable transcendental energy, that He can controlthe infinite and the finite simultaneously and that He can remain alooffrom them. Although the foolish cannot imagine how Krsna, who appearsjust like a human being, can control the infinite and the finite, those
who are pure devotees accept this, for they know that Krsna is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore they completely surrenderunto Him and engage in Krsna consciousness, devotional service of theLord.There are many controversies amongst the impersonalists and thepersonalists about the Lord's appearance as a human being. But if weconsult Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam, the authoritative textsfor understanding the science of Krsna, then we can understand thatKrsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is not an ordinary man,although He appeared on this earth as an ordinary human. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam, First Canto, First Chapter, when the sages inquire aboutthe activities of Krsna, it is stated that His appearance as a manbewilders the foolish. No human being could perform the wonderful actsthat Krsna performed while He was present on this earth. When Krsnaappeared before His father and mother, Vasudeva and Devaki, He appearedwith four hands, but after the prayers of the parents, He transformedHimself into an ordinary child. His appearance as an ordinary humanbeing is one of the features of His transcendental body. In theEleventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gita also it is stated that Arjuna prayedto see Krsna's form of four hands (tenaiva rupena catur-bhujena).Arjuna prayed to see again that form of four hands, and when Krsna wasthus petitioned by Arjuna, He again assumed His original form. Allthese different features of the Supreme Lord are certainly not those ofan ordinary human being.Some of those who deride Krsna, who are infected with the Mayavadi,philosophy quote the following verse from the Srimad-Bhagavatam(3.29.21) to prove that Krsna is just an ordinary man. Aham sarvesubhutesu bhutatmavasthitah sada: "The Supreme is present in every livingentity." We should better take note of this particular verse from theVaisnava acaryas like Jiva Gosvami instead of following theinterpretation of unauthorized persons who deride Krsna. Jiva Gosvami,commenting on this verse, says that Krsna, in His plenary expansion asParamatma, is situated in the moving and the nonmoving entities as theSupersoul, so any neophyte devotee who simply gives his attention tothe arca-murti, the form of the Supreme Lord in the temple, and doesnot respect other living entities is uselessly worshiping the form ofthe Lord in the temple. There are three kinds of devotees of the Lord,and the neophyte is in the lowest stage. The neophyte devotee givesmore attention to the Deity in the temple than to other devotees, soJiva Gosvami warns that this sort of mentality should be corrected. Adevotee should see that Krsna is present in everyone's heart asParamatma; therefore every body is the embodiment of or the temple ofthe Supreme Lord, and as such, as one offers respect to the temple ofthe Lord, he should similarly properly respect each and every body inwhom the Paramatma dwells. Everyone should therefore be given properrespect and should not be neglected.There are also many impersonalists who deride temple worship. They saythat since God is everywhere, why should one restrict himself to templeworship? But if God is everywhere, is He not in the temple or in theDeity? Although the personalist and the impersonalist will fight withone another perpetually, a perfect devotee in Krsna consciousness knowsthat although Krsna is the Supreme Personality, He is all-pervading, asis confirmed in the Brahma-samhita. Although His personal abode isGoloka Vrndavana and He is always staying there, still, by Hisdifferent manifestations of energy and by His plenary expansion, He ispresent everywhere in all parts of the material and spiritualcreations.
TEXT 12
moghasa mogha-karmano
mogha-jnana vicetasahraksasim asurim caivaprakrtim mohinim sritah
SYNONYMSmogha-asah--baffled hope; mogha-karmanah--baffled in fruitive
activities; mogha-jnanah--baffled in knowledge; vicetasah--bewildered;raksasim--demonic; asurim--atheistic; ca--and; eva--certainly;prakrtim--nature; mohinim--bewildering; sritah--taking shelter of.
TRANSLATIONThose who are thus bewildered are attracted by demonic and atheistic
views. In that deluded condition, their hopes for liberation, theirfruitive activities, and their culture of knowledge are all defeated.
PURPORTThere are many devotees who assume themselves to be in Krsna
consciousness and devotional service but at heart do not accept theSupreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, as the Absolute Truth. For them,the fruit of devotional service--going back to Godhead--will never betasted. Similarly, those who are engaged in fruitive, pious activitiesand who are ultimately hoping to be liberated from this materialentanglement will never be successful either because they deride theSupreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. In other words, persons who mockKrsna are to be understood to be demonic or atheistic. As described inthe Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gita, such demonic miscreants neversurrender to Krsna. Therefore their mental speculations to arrive atthe Absolute Truth bring them to the false conclusion that the ordinaryliving entity and Krsna are one and the same. With such a falseconviction, they think that the body of any human being is now simplycovered by material nature and that as soon as one is liberated fromthis material body there is no difference between God and himself. Thisattempt to become one with Krsna will be baffled because of delusion.Such atheistic and demoniac cultivation of spiritual knowledge isalways futile. That is the indication of this verse. For such persons,cultivation of the knowledge in the Vedic literature, like the Vedanta-sutra and the Upanisads, is always baffled.It is a great offense, therefore, to consider Krsna, the SupremePersonality of Godhead, to be an ordinary man. Those who do so arecertainly deluded because they cannot understand the eternal form ofKrsna. In the Brhad-viasnava mantra it is clearly stated that one whoconsiders the body of Krsna to be material should be driven out fromall rituals and activities of the sruti. And if one by chance sees hisface, he should at once take bath in the Ganges to rid himself ofinfection. People jeer at Krsna because they are envious of the SupremePersonality of Godhead. Their destiny is certainly to take birth afterbirth in the species of atheistic and demoniac life. Perpetually, theirreal knowledge will remain under delusion, and gradually they willregress to the darkest region of creation.
TEXT 13
mahatmanas tu mam partha
daivim prakrtim asritahbhajanty ananya-manasojnatva bhutadim avyayam
SYNONYMSmaha-atmanah--the great souls; tu--but; mam--unto Me; partha--O son of
Prtha; daivim--divine; prakrtim--nature; asritah--taken shelter of;bhajanti--render service; ananya-manasah--without deviation of themind; jnatva--knowing; bhuta--creation; adim--original; avyayam--inexhaustible.
TRANSLATIONO son of Prtha, those who are not deluded, the great souls, are under
the protection of the divine nature. They are fully engaged indevotional service because they know Me as the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, original and inexhaustible.
PURPORTIn this verse the description of mahatma is clearly given. The first
sign of the mahatma is that he is already situated in the divinenature. He is not under the control of material nature. And how is thiseffected? That is explained in the Seventh Chapter: one who surrendersunto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, at once becomesfreed from the control of material nature. That is the qualification.One can become free from the control of material nature as soon as hesurrenders his soul to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is thepreliminary formula. Being marginal potency, as soon as the livingentity is freed from the control of material nature, he is put underthe guidance of the spiritual nature. The guidance of the spiritualnature is called daivi prakrti, divine nature. So when one is promotedin that way--by surrendering to the Supreme Personality of Godhead--oneattains to the stage of great soul, mahatma.The mahatma does not divert his attention to anything outside Krsnabecause he knows perfectly well that Krsna is the original SupremePerson, the cause of all causes. There is no doubt about it. Such amahatma, or great soul, develops through association with othermahatmas, pure devotees. Pure devotees are not even attracted byKrsna's other features, such as the four-armed Maha-Visnu. They aresimply attracted by the two-armed form of Krsna. Since they are notattracted to other features of Krsna (what to speak of the demigods),they are mot concerned with any form of a demigod or of a human being.They only meditate upon Krsna in Krsna consciousness. They are alwaysengaging in the unswerving service of the Lord in Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 14
satatam kirtayanto mam
yatantas ca drdha-vratahnamasyantas ca mam bhaktyanitya-yukta upasate
SYNONYMS
satatam--always; kirtayantah--chanting; mam--Me; yatantah ca--fully
endeavoring also; drdha-vratah--with determination; namasyantah ca--offering obeisances; mam--unto Me; bhaktya--in devotion; nitya-yuktah--perpetually engaged; upasate--worship.
TRANSLATIONAlways chanting My glories, endeavoring with great determination,
bowing down before Me, these great souls perpetually worship Me withdevotion.
PURPORTThe mahatma cannot be manufactured by rubber-stamping an ordinary man.
His symptoms are described here: a mahatma is always engaged inchanting the glories of the Supreme Lord Krsna, the Personality ofGodhead. He has no other business. He is always engaged in theglorification of the Lord. In other words, he is not an impersonalist.When the question of glorification is there, one has to glorify theSupreme Lord, praising His holy name, His eternal form, Histranscendental qualities and His uncommon pastimes. One has to glorifyall these things; therefore a mahatma is attached to the SupremePersonality of Godhead.One who is attached to the impersonal feature of the Supreme Lord, thebrahmajyoti, is not described as mahatma in the Bhagavad-gita. He isdescribed in a different way in the next verse. The mahatma is alwaysengaged in different activities of devotional service, as described inthe Srimad-Bhagavatam, hearing and chanting about Visnu, not a demigodor human being. That is devotion: sravanam kirtanam visnoh andsmaranam, remembering Him. Such a mahatma has firm determination toachieve at the ultimate end the association of the Supreme Lord in anyone of the five transcendental rasas. To achieve that success, heengages all activities--mental, bodily and vocal, everything--in theservice of the Supreme Lord, Sri Krsna. That is called full Krsnaconsciousness.In devotional service there are certain activities which are calleddetermined, such as fasting on certain days, like the eleventh day ofthe moon, Ekadasi, and on the appearance day of the Lord, etc. Allthese rules and regulations are offered by the great acaryas for thosewho are actually interested in getting admission into the associationof the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the transcendental world. Themahatmas, great souls, strictly observe all these rules andregulations, and therefore they are sure to achieve the desired result.As described in the second verse of this chapter, this devotionalservice is not only easy, but it can be performed in a happy mood. Onedoes not need to undergo any severe penance and austerity. He can livethis life in devotional service, guided by an expert spiritual master,and in any position, either as a householder or a sannyasi or abrahmacari; in any position and anywhere in the world, he can performthis devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and thusbecome actually mahatma, a great soul.
TEXT 15
jnana-yajnena capy anye
yajanto mam upasateekatvena prthaktvenabahudha visvato-mukham
SYNONYMS
jnana-yajnena--by cultivation of knowledge; ca--also; api--certainly;
anye--others; yajantah--worshiping; mam--Me; upasate--worship;ekatvena--in oneness; prthaktvena--in duality; bahudha--diversity;visvatah-mukham--in the universal form.
TRANSLATIONOthers, who are engaged in the cultivation of knowledge, worship the
Supreme Lord as the one without a second, diverse in many, and in theuniversal form.
PURPORTThis verse is the summary of the previous verses. The Lord tells Arjuna
that those who are purely in Krsna consciousness and do not knowanything other than Krsna are called mahatma; yet there are otherpersons who are not exactly in the position of mahatma but who worshipKrsna also, in different ways. Some of them are already described asthe distressed, the financially destitute, the inquisitive, and thosewho are engaged in the cultivation of knowledge. But there are otherswho are still lower, and these are divided into three: 1) he whoworships himself as one with the Supreme Lord, 2) he who concocts someform of the Supreme Lord and worships that, and 3) he who accepts theuniversal form, the visvarupa of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,and worships that. Out of the above three, the lowest, those whoworship themselves as the Supreme Lord, thinking themselves to bemonists, are most predominant. Such people think themselves to be theSupreme Lord, and in this mentality they worship themselves. This isalso a type of God worship, for they can understand that they are notthe material body but are actually spiritual soul; at least, such asense is prominent. Generally the impersonalists worship the SupremeLord in this way. The second class includes the worshipers of thedemigods, those who by imagination consider any form to be the form ofthe Supreme Lord. And the third class includes those who cannotconceive of anything beyond the manifestation of this materialuniverse. They consider the universe to be the supreme organism orentity and worship that. The universe is also a form of the Lord.
TEXT 16
aham kratur aham yajnahsvadhaham aham ausadhammantro 'ham aham evajyamaham agnir aham hutam
SYNONYMSaham--I; kratuh--ritual; aham--I; yajnah--sacrifice; svadha--oblation;
aham--I; aham--I; ausadham--healing herb; mantrah--transcendentalchant; aham--I; aham--I; eva--certainly; ajyam--melted butter; aham--I;agnih--fire; aham--I; hutam--offering.
TRANSLATION
But it is I who am the ritual, I the sacrifice, the offering to the
ancestors, the healing herb, the transcendental chant. I am the butterand the fire and the offering.
PURPORTThe sacrifice known as jyotistoma is also Krsna, and He is also the
maha-yajna. The oblations offered to the Pitrloka or the sacrificeperformed to please the Pitrloka, considered as a kind of drug in theform of clarified butter, is also Krsna. The mantras chanted in thisconnection are also Krsna. And many other commodities made with milkproducts for offering in the sacrifices are also Krsna. The fire isalso Krsna because fire is one of the five material elements and istherefore claimed as the separated energy of Krsna. In other words, theVedic sacrifices recommended in the karma-kanda division of the Vedasare in total also Krsna. Or, in other words, those who are engaged inrendering devotional service unto Krsna are to be understood to haveperformed all the sacrifices recommended in the Vedas.
TEXT 17
pitaham asya jagato
mata dhata pitamahahvedyam pavitram omkarark sama yajur eva ca
SYNONYMSpita--father; aham--I; asya--of this; jagatah--of the universe; mata--
mother; dhata--supporter; pitamahah--grandfather; vedyam--what is to beknown; pavitram--that which purifies; om-kara--the syllable om; rk--theRg Veda; sama--the Sama Veda; yajuh--the Yajur Veda; eva--certainly;ca--and.
TRANSLATIONI am the father of this universe, the mother, the support, and the
grandsire. I am the object of knowledge, the purifier and the syllableom. I am also the Rg, the Sama, and the Yajur [Vedas].
PURPORTThe entire cosmic manifestations, moving and nonmoving, are manifested
by different activities of Krsna's energy. In the material existence wecreate different relationships with different living entities who arenothing but Krsna's marginal energy, but under the creation of prakrtisome of them appear as our father, mother, grandfather, creator, etc.,but actually they are parts and parcels of Krsna. As such, these livingentities who appear to be our father, mother, etc., are nothing butKrsna. In this verse the word dhata means "creator." Not only are ourfather and mother parts and parcels of Krsna, but their creator,grandmother and grandfather, etc., are also Krsna. Actually any livingentity, being part and parcel of Krsna, is Krsna. All the Vedas,therefore, aim only toward Krsna. Whatever we want to know through theVedas is but a progressive step to understanding Krsna. That subjectmatter which helps us purify our constitutional position is especiallyKrsna. Similarly, the living entity who is inquisitive to understandall Vedic principles is also part and parcel of Krsna and as such is
also Krsna. In all the Vedic mantras the word om, called pranava, is a
transcendental sound vibration and is also Krsna. And because in allthe hymns of the four Vedas, Sama, Yajur, Rg and Atharva, the pranavaor omkara, is very prominent, it is understood to be Krsna.
TEXT 18
gatir bharta prabhuh saksi
nivasah saranam suhrtprabhavah pralayah sthanamnidhanam bijam avyayam
SYNONYMSgatih--goal; bharta--sustainer; prabhuh--Lord; saksi--witness; nivasah-
-abode; saranam--refuge; su-hrt--most intimate friend; prabhavah--creation; pralayah--dissolution; sthanam--ground; nidhanam--restingplace; bijam--seed; avyayam--imperishable.
TRANSLATIONI am the goal, the sustainer, the master, the witness, the abode, the
refuge and the most dear friend. I am the creation and theannihilation, the basis of everything, the resting place and theeternal seed.
PURPORTGati means the destination where we want to go. But the ultimate goal
is Krsna, although people do not know it. One who does not know Krsnais misled, and his so-called progressive march is either partial orhallucinatory. There are many who make as their destination differentdemigods, and by rigid performance of the strict respective methodsthey reach different planets known as Candraloka, Suryaloka, Indraloka,Maharloka, etc. But all such lokas, or planets, being creations ofKrsna, are simultaneously Krsna and not Krsna. Actually such planets,being manifestations of Krsna's energy, are also Krsna, but actuallythey serve only as a step forward for realization of Krsna. To approachthe different energies of Krsna is to approach Krsna indirectly. Oneshould directly approach Krsna, for that will save time and energy. Forexample, if there is a possibility of going to the top of a building bythe help of an elevator, why should one go by the staircase, step bystep? Everything is resting on Krsna's energy; therefore withoutKrsna's shelter nothing can exist. Krsna is the supreme ruler becauseeverything belongs to Him and everything exists on His energy. Krsna,being situated in everyone's heart, is the supreme witness. Theresidences, countries or planets on which we live are also Krsna. Krsnais the ultimate goal of shelter, and as such one should take shelter ofKrsna either for protection or for annihilation of his distressedcondition. And whenever we have to take protection, we should know thatour protection must be a living force. Thus Krsna is the supreme livingentity. Since Krsna is the source of our generation, or the supremefather, no one can be a better friend than Krsna, nor can anyone be abetter well-wisher. Krsna is the original source of creation and theultimate rest after annihilation. Krsna is therefore the eternal causeof all causes.
TEXT 19
tapamy aham aham varsam
nigrhnamy utsrjami caamrtam caiva mrtyus casad asac caham arjuna
SYNONYMStapami--give heat; aham--I; aham--I; varsam--rain; nigrhnami--withhold;
utsrjami--send forth; ca--and; amrtam--immortality; ca--and; eva--certainly; mrtyuh--death; ca--and; sat--being; asat--nonbeing; ca--and;aham--I; arjuna--O Arjuna.
TRANSLATIONO Arjuna, I control heat, the rain and the drought. I am immortality,
and I am also death personified. Both being and nonbeing are in Me.
PURPORTKrsna, by His different energies, diffuses heat and light through the
agency of electricity and the sun. During summer season it is Krsna whochecks rain from falling from the sky, and then during the rainy seasonHe gives unceasing torrents of rain. The energy which sustains us byprolonging the duration of our life is Krsna, and Krsna meets us at theend as death. By analyzing all these different energies of Krsna, onecan ascertain that for Krsna there is no distinction between matter andspirit, or, in other words, He is both matter and spirit. In theadvanced stage of Krsna consciousness, one does not therefore make suchdistinctions. He sees Krsna only in everything.Since Krsna is both matter and spirit, the gigantic universal formcomprising all material manifestations is also Krsna, and His pastimesin Vrndavana as two-handed Syamasundara, playing on a flute, are thoseof the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 20
trai-vidya mam soma-pah puta-papa
yajnair istva svar-gatim prarthayantete punyam asadya surendra-lokamasnanti divyan divi deva-bhogan
SYNONYMStrai-vidyah--the knowers of the three Vedas; mam--unto Me; soma-pah--
drinkers of soma juice; puta--purified; papah--sins; yajnaih--withsacrifices; istva--after worshiping; svah-gatim--passage to heaven;prarthayante--pray; te--they; punyam--virtue; asadya--enjoying; sura-indra--of Indra; lokam--the world; asnanti--enjoy; divyan--celestial;divi--in heaven; deva-bhogan--pleasures of the gods.
TRANSLATIONThose who study the Vedas and drink the soma juice, seeking the
heavenly planets, worship Me indirectly. They take birth on the planetof Indra, where they enjoy godly delights.
PURPORT
The word trai-vidyah refers to the three Vedas, Sama, Yajur and Rg. A
brahmana who has studied these three Vedas is called a tri-vedi. Anyonewho is very much attached to knowledge derived from these three Vedasis respected in society. Unfortunately, there are many great scholarsof the Vedas who do not know the ultimate purport of studying them.Therefore Krsna herein declares Himself to be the ultimate goal for thetri-vedis. Actual tri-vedis take shelter under the lotus feet of Krsnaand engage in pure devotional service to satisfy the Lord. Devotionalservice begins with the chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra and side byside trying to understand Krsna in truth. Unfortunately those who aresimply official students of the Vedas become more interested inoffering sacrifices to the different demigods like Indra, Candra, etc.By such endeavor, the worshipers of different demigods are certainlypurified of the contamination of the lower qualities of nature and arethereby elevated to the higher planetary systems or heavenly planetsknown as Maharloka, Janoloka, Tapoloka, etc. Once situated on thosehigher planetary systems, one can satisfy his senses hundreds ofthousands of times better than on this planet.
TEXT 21
te tam bhuktva svarga-lokam visalam
ksine punye martya-lokam visantievam trayi-dharmam anuprapannagatagatam kama-kama labhante
SYNONYMSte--they; tam--that; bhuktva--enjoying; svarga-lokam--heaven; visalam--
vast; ksine--being exhausted; punye--merits; martya-lokam--mortalearth; visanti--fall down; evam--thus; trayi--three Vedas; dharmam--doctrines; anuprapannah--following; gata-agatam--death and birth; kama-kamah--desiring sense enjoyments; labhante--attain.
TRANSLATIONWhen they have thus enjoyed heavenly sense pleasure, they return to
this mortal planet again. Thus, through the Vedic principles, theyachieve only flickering happiness.
PURPORTOne who is promoted to those higher planetary systems enjoys a longer
duration of life and better facilities for sense enjoyment, yet one isnot allowed to stay there forever. One is again sent back to thisearthly planet upon finishing the resultant fruits of pious activities.He who has not attained perfection of knowledge, as indicated in theVedanta-sutra (janmady asya yatah), or, in other words, he who fails tounderstand Krsna, the cause of all causes, becomes baffled in achievingthe ultimate goal of life and is thus subjected to the routine of beingpromoted to the higher planets and then again coming down, as ifsituated on a ferris wheel which sometimes goes up and sometimes comesdown. The purport is that instead of being elevated to the spiritualworld where there is no longer any possibility of coming down, onesimply revolves in the cycle of birth and death on higher and lowerplanetary systems. One should better take to the spiritual world to
enjoy eternal life of full bliss and knowledge and never return to this
miserable material existence.
TEXT 22
ananyas cintayanto mam
ye janah paryupasatetesam nityabhiyuktanamyoga-ksemam vahamy aham
SYNONYMSananyah--no other; cintayantah--concentrating; mam--unto Me; ye--who;
janah--persons; paryupasate--properly worship; tesam--their; nitya--always; abhiyuktanam--fixed in devotion; yoga-ksemam--requirements;vahami--carry; aham--I.
TRANSLATIONBut those who worship Me with devotion, meditating on My transcendental
form--to them I carry what they lack and preserve what they have.
PURPORTOne who is unable to live for a moment without Krsna consciousness
cannot but think of Krsna twenty-four hours, being engaged indevotional service by hearing, chanting, remembering, offering prayers,worshiping, serving the lotus feet of the Lord, rendering otherservices, cultivating friendship and surrendering fully to the Lord.Such activities are all auspicious and full of spiritual potencies;indeed, they make the devotee perfect in self-realization. Then hisonly desire is to achieve the association of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. This is called yoga. By the mercy of the Lord, such a devoteenever comes back to this material condition of life. Ksema refers tothe merciful protection of the Lord. The Lord helps the devotee toachieve Krsna consciousness by yoga, and when he becomes fully Krsnaconscious the Lord protects him from falling down to a miserableconditioned life.
TEXT 23
ye 'py anya-devata-bhakta
yajante sraddhayanvitahte 'pi mam eva kaunteyayajanty avidhi-purvakam
SYNONYMSye--those; api--also; anya--other; devata--demigods; bhaktah--devotees;
yajante--worship; sraddhaya anvitah--with faith; te--they; api--also;mam--Me; eva--even; kaunteya--O son of Kunti; yajanti--sacrifice;avidhi-purvakam--in a wrong way.
TRANSLATIONWhatever a man may sacrifice to other gods, O son of Kunti, is really
meant for Me alone, but it is offered without true understanding.
PURPORT
"Persons who are engaged in the worship of demigods are not very
intelligent, although such worship is done to Me indirectly," Krsnasays. For example, when a man pours water on the leaves and branches ofa tree without pouring water on the root, he does so without sufficientknowledge or without observing regulative principles. Similarly, theprocess of rendering service to the different parts of the body is tosupply food to the stomach. The demigods are, so to speak, differentofficers and directors in the government of the Supreme Lord. One hasto follow the laws made by the government, not by the officers ordirectors. Similarly, everyone is to offer his worship to the SupremeLord only. That will automatically satisfy the different officers anddirectors of the Lord. The officers and directors are engaged asrepresentatives of the government, and to offer some bribe to theofficers and directors is illegal. This is stated here as avidhi-purvakam. In other words, Krsna does not approve the unnecessaryworship of the demigods.
TEXT 24
aham hi sarva-yajnanam
bhokta ca prabhur eva cana tu mam abhijanantitattvenatas cyavanti te
SYNONYMSaham--I; hi--surely; sarva--of all; yajnanam--sacrifices; bhokta--
enjoyer; ca--and; prabhuh--Lord; eva--also; ca--and; na--not; tu--but;mam--Me; abhijananti--know; tattvena--in reality; atah--therefore;cyavanti--fall down; te--they.
TRANSLATIONI am the only enjoyer and the only object of sacrifice. Those who do
not recognize My true transcendental nature fall down.
PURPORTHere it is clearly stated that there are many types of yajna
performances recommended in the Vedic literatures, but actually all ofthem are meant for satisfying the Supreme Lord. Yajna means Visnu. Inthe Second Chapter of Bhagavad-gita it is clearly stated that oneshould only work for satisfying Yajna or Visnu. The perfectional formof human civilization, known as varnasrama-dharma, is specificallymeant for satisfying Visnu. Therefore, Krsna says in this verse, "I amthe enjoyer of all sacrifices because I am the supreme master."However, less intelligent persons, without knowing this fact, worshipdemigods for temporary benefit. Therefore they fall down to materialexistence and do not achieve the desired goal of life. If, however,anyone has any material desire to be fulfilled, he had better pray forit to the Supreme Lord (although that is not pure devotion), and hewill thus achieve the desired result.
TEXT 25
yanti deva-vrata devan
pitrn yanti pitr-vratah
bhutani yanti bhutejyayanti mad-yajino 'pi mam
SYNONYMSyanti--achieve; deva-vratah--worshipers of demigods; devan--to
demigods; pitrn--to ancestors; yanti--go; pitr-vratah--worshipers ofthe ancestors; bhutani--to ghosts and spirits; yanti--go; bhuta-ijyah--worshipers of ghosts and spirits; yanti--go; mat--My; yajinah--devotees; api--also; mam--unto Me.
TRANSLATIONThose who worship the demigods will take birth among the demigods;
those who worship ghosts and spirits will take birth among such beings;those who worship ancestors go to the ancestors; and those who worshipMe will live with Me.
PURPORTIf one has any desire to go to the moon, the sun, or any other planet,
one can attain the desired destination by following specific Vedicprinciples recommended for that purpose. These are vividly described inthe fruitive activities portion of the Vedas, technically known asdarsa-paurnamasi, which recommends a specific worship of demigodssituated on different heavenly planets. Similarly, one can attain thePita planets by performing a specific yajna. Similarly, one can go tomany ghostly planets and become a Yaksa, Raksa or Pisaca. Pisacaworship is called "black arts" or "black magic." There are many men whopractice this black art, and they think that it is spiritualism, butsuch activities are completely materialistic. Similarly, a puredevotee, who worships the Supreme Personality of Godhead only, achievesthe planets of Vaikuntha and Krsnaloka without a doubt. It is very easyto understand through this important verse that if by simply worshipingthe demigods one can achieve the heavenly planets, or by worshiping thePitas achieve the Pita planets, or by practicing the black arts achievethe ghostly planets, why can the pure devotee not achieve the planet ofKrsna or Visnu? Unfortunately many people have no information of thesesublime planets where Krsna and Visnu live, and because they do notknow of them they fall down. Even the impersonalists fall down from thebrahmajyoti. This Krsna consciousness movement is thereforedistributing sublime information to the entire human society to theeffect that simply by chanting the Hare Krsna mantra one can becomeperfect in this life and go back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 26
patram puspam phalam toyam
yo me bhaktya prayacchatitad aham bhakty-upahrtamasnami prayatatmanah
SYNONYMSpatram--a leaf; puspam--a flower; phalam--a fruit; toyam--water; yah--
whoever; me--unto Me; bhaktya--with devotion; prayacchati--offers; tat-
-that; aham--I; bhakti-upahrtam--offered in devotion; asnami--accept;
prayata-atmanah--of one in pure consciousness.
TRANSLATIONIf one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit or
water, I will accept it.
PURPORTHere Lord Krsna, having established that He is the only enjoyer, the
primeval Lord, and the real object of all sacrificial offerings,reveals what types of sacrifices He desires to be offered. If onewishes to engage in devotional service to the Supreme in order to bepurified and reach the goal of life--the transcendental loving serviceof God--then he should find out what the Lord desires of him. One wholoves Krsna will give Him whatever He wants, and he avoids offeringanything which is undesirable or unasked for. Thus meat, fish and eggsshould not be offered to Krsna. If He desired such things as offerings,He would have said so. Instead He clearly requests that a leaf, afruit, flowers and water be given to Him, and He says of this offering,"I will accept it." Therefore, we should understand that He will notaccept meat, fish and eggs. Vegetables, grains, fruits, milk and waterare the proper foods for human beings and are prescribed by Lord KrsnaHimself. Whatever else we eat cannot be offered to Him, since He willnot accept it. Thus we cannot be acting on the level of loving devotionif we offer such foods.In the Third Chapter, verse thirteen, Sri Krsna explains that only theremains of sacrifice are purified and fit for consumption by those whoare seeking advancement in life and release from the clutches of thematerial entanglement. Those who do not make an offering of their food,He says in the same verse, are said to be eating only sin. In otherwords, their every mouthful is simply deepening their involvement inthe complexities of material nature. But preparing nice, simplevegetable dishes, offering them before the picture or Deity of LordKrsna and bowing down and praying for Him to accept such a humbleoffering, enables one to advance steadily in life, to purify the body,and to create fine brain tissues which will lead to clear thinking.Above all, the offering should be made with an attitude of love. Krsnahas no need of food, since He already possesses everything that be, yetHe will accept the offering of one who desires to please Him in thatway. The important element, in preparation, in serving and in offering,is to act with love for Krsna.The impersonalist philosophers, who wish to maintain that the AbsoluteTruth is without senses, cannot comprehend this verse of Bhagavad-gita.To them, it is either a metaphor or proof of the mundane character ofKrsna, the speaker of the Gita. But, in actuality, Krsna, the SupremeGodhead, has senses, and it is stated that His senses areinterchangeable; in other words, one sense can perform the function ofany other. This is what it means to say that Krsna is absolute. Lackingsenses, He could hardly be considered full in all opulences. In theSeventh Chapter, Krsna has explained that He impregnates the livingentities into material nature. This is done by His looking uponmaterial nature. And so in this instance, Krsna's hearing the devotee'swords of love in offering foodstuffs is wholly identical with Hiseating and actually tasting. This point should be emphasized: becauseof His absolute position, His hearing is wholly identical with Hiseating and tasting. Only the devotee, who accepts Krsna as He describes
Himself, without interpretation, can understand that the Supreme
Absolute Truth can eat food and enjoy it.
TEXT 27
yat karosi yad asnasi
yaj juhosi dadasi yatyat tapasyasi kaunteyatat kurusva mad-arpanam
SYNONYMSyat--whatever; karosi--you do; yat--whatever; asnasi--you eat; yat--
whatever; juhosi--you offer; dadasi--you give away; yat--whatever; yat--whatever; tapasyasi--austerities you perform; kaunteya--O son ofKunti; tat--that; kurusva--make; mat--unto Me; arpanam--offering.
TRANSLATIONO son of Kunti, all that you do, all that you eat, all that you offer
and give away, as well as all austerities that you may perform, shouldbe done as an offering unto Me.
PURPORTThus, it is the duty of everyone to mold his life in such a way that he
will not forget Krsna in any circumstance. Everyone has to work formaintenance of his body and soul together, and Krsna recommends hereinthat one should work for Him. Everyone has to eat something to live;therefore he should accept the remnants of foodstuffs offered to Krsna.Any civilized man has to perform some religious ritualistic ceremonies;therefore Krsna recommends, "Do it for Me," and this is called arcana.Everyone has a tendency to give something in charity; Krsna says, "Giveit to Me," and this means that all surplus money accumulated should beutilized in furthering the Krsna consciousness movement. Nowadayspeople are very much inclined to the meditational process, which is notpractical in this age, but if anyone practices meditating on Krsnatwenty-four hours by chanting the Hare Krsna mantra round his beads, heis surely the greatest yogi. as substantiated by the Sixth Chapter ofBhagavad-gita.
TEXT 28
subhasubha-phalair evam
moksyase karma-bandhanaihsannyasa-yoga-yuktatmavimukto mam upaisyasi
SYNONYMSsubha--good; asubha--evil; phalaih--results; evam--thus; moksyase--
free; karma--action; bandhanaih--bondage; sannyasa--of renunciation;yoga--the yoga; yukta-atma--having the mind firmly set on; vimuktah--liberated; mam--to Me; upaisyasi--you will attain.
TRANSLATION
In this way you will be freed from all reactions to good and evil
deeds, and by this principle of renunciation you will be liberated andcome to Me.
PURPORTOne who acts in Krsna consciousness under superior direction is called
yukta. The technical term is yukta-vairagya. This is further explainedby Rupa Gosvami as follows:
anasaktasya visayan
yatharham upayunjatahnirbandhah krsna-sambandheyuktam vairagyam ucyate
(Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 2.255)
Rupa Gosvami says that as long as we are in this material world we haveto act; we cannot cease acting. Therefore if actions are performed andthe fruits are given to Krsna, then that is called yukta-vairagya.Actually situated in renunciation, such activities clear the mirror ofthe mind, and as the actor gradually makes progress in spiritualrealization he becomes completely surrendered to the SupremePersonality of Godhead. Therefore at the end he becomes liberated, andthis liberation is also specified. By this liberation he does notbecome one with the brahmajyoti, but rather enters into the planet ofthe Supreme Lord. It is clearly mentioned here: mam upaisyasi, "hecomes to Me," back home, back to Godhead. There are five differentstages of liberation, and here it is specified that the devotee who hasalways lived his lifetime here under the direction of the Supreme Lord,as stated, has evolved to the point where he can after quitting thisbody, go back to Godhead and engage directly in the association of theSupreme Lord.Anyone who has no other interest but to dedicate his life to theservice of the Lord is actually a sannyasi. Such a person always thinksof himself as an eternal servant, dependent on the supreme will of theLord. As such, whatever he does, he does it for the benefit of theLord. Whatever action he performs, he performs it as service to theLord. He does not give serious attention to the fruitive activities orprescribed duties mentioned in the Vedas. For ordinary persons it isobligatory to execute the prescribed duties mentioned in the Vedas, butalthough a pure devotee who is completely engaged in the service of theLord may sometimes appear to go against the prescribed Vedic duties,actually it is not so.It is said, therefore, by Vaisnava authorities that even the mostintelligent person cannot understand the plans and activities of a puredevotee. The exact words are tanra vakya, kriya, mudra vijneha nabujhaya (Caitanya-caritamrta, Madhya 23.39). A person who is thusalways engaged in the service of the Lord or is always thinking andplanning how to serve the Lord is to be considered completely liberatedat present and in the future. His going back home, back to Godhead, isguaranteed. He is above all materialistic criticism, just as Krsna isabove all criticism.
TEXT 29
samo 'ham sarva-bhutesu
na me dvesyo 'sti na priyahye bhajanti tu mam bhaktya
mayi te tesu capy aham
SYNONYMSsamah--equally disposed; aham--I; sarva-bhutesu--to all living
entities; na--no one; me--Mine; dvesyah--hateful; asti--is; na--nor;priyah--dear; ye--those; bhajanti--render transcendental service; tu--yet; mam--unto Me; bhaktya--in devotion; mayi--unto Me; te--suchpersons; tesu--in them; ca--also; api--certainly; aham--I.
TRANSLATIONI envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But
whoever renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me, andI am also a friend to him.
PURPORTOne may question here that if Krsna is equal to everyone and no one is
His special friend, then why does He take a special interest in thedevotees who are always engaged in His transcendental service? But thisis not discrimination; it is natural. Any man in this material worldmay be very charitably disposed, yet he has a special interest in hisown children. The Lord claims that every living entity--in whateverform is His son, and as such He provides everyone with a generoussupply of the necessities of life. He is just like a cloud which poursrain all over, regardless of whether it falls on rock or land or water.But for His devotees, He gives specific attention. Such devotees arementioned here: they are always in Krsna consciousness, and thereforethey are always transcendentally situated in Krsna. The very phrase"Krsna consciousness" suggests that those who are in such consciousnessare living transcendentalists, situated in Him. The Lord says heredistinctly, mayi te, "in Me." Naturally, as a result, the Lord is alsoin them. This is reciprocal. This also explains the words ye yatha mamprapadyante tams tathaiva bhajamy aham: "Whoever surrenders unto Me,proportionately I take care of him." This transcendental reciprocationexists because both the Lord and the devotee are conscious. When adiamond is set in a golden ring, it looks very nice. The gold isglorified, and at the same time the diamond is glorified. The Lord andthe living entity eternally glitter, and when a living entity becomesinclined to the service of the Supreme Lord he looks like gold. TheLord is a diamond, and so this combination is very nice. Livingentities in a pure state are called devotees. The Supreme Lord becomesthe devotee of His devotees. If a reciprocal relationship is notpresent between the devotee and the Lord, then there is no personalistphilosophy. In the impersonal philosophy there is no reciprocationbetween the Supreme and the living entity, but in the personalistphilosophy there is.The example is often given that the Lord is like a desire tree, andwhatever one wants from this desire tree, the Lord supplies. But herethe explanation is more complete. The Lord is here stated to be partialto the devotees. This is the manifestation of the Lord's special mercyto the devotees. The Lord's reciprocation should not be considered tobe under the law of karma. It belongs to the transcendental situationin which the Lord and His devotees function. Devotional service of theLord is not an activity of this material world; it is part of thespiritual world, where eternity, bliss and knowledge predominate.
TEXT 30
api cet su-duracaro
bhajate mam ananya-bhaksadhur eva sa mantavyahsamyag vyavasito hi sah
SYNONYMSapi--in spite of; cet--although; su-duracarah--one committing the most
abominable actions; bhajate--engaged in devotional service; mam--untoMe; ananya-bhak--without deviation; sadhuh--saint; eva--certainly; sah--he; mantavyah--to be considered; samyak--completely; vyavasitah--situated; hi--certainly; sah--he.
TRANSLATIONEven if one commits the most abominable actions, if he is engaged in
devotional service, he is to be considered saintly because he isproperly situated.
PURPORTThe word su-duracarah used in this verse is very significant, and we
should understand it properly. When a living entity is conditioned, hehas two kinds of activities: one is conditional, and the other isconstitutional. As for protecting the body or abiding by the rules ofsociety and state, certainly there are different activities, even forthe devotees, in connection with the conditional life, and suchactivities are called conditional. Besides these, the living entity whois fully conscious of his spiritual nature and is engaged in Krsnaconsciousness, or the devotional service of the Lord, has activitieswhich are called transcendental. Such activities are performed in hisconstitutional position, and they are technically called devotionalservice. Now, in the conditioned state, sometimes devotional serviceand the conditional service in relation to the body will parallel oneanother. But then again, sometimes these activities become opposed toone another. As far as possible, a devotee is very cautious so that hedoes not do anything that could disrupt his wholesome condition. Heknows that perfection in his activities depends on his progressiverealization of Krsna consciousness. Sometimes, however, it may be seenthat a person in Krsna consciousness commits some act which may betaken as most abominable socially or politically. But such a temporaryfalldown does not disqualify him. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is statedthat if a person falls down but is wholeheartedly engaged in thetranscendental service of the Supreme Lord, the Lord, being situatedwithin his heart, beautifies him and excuses him from that abomination.The material contamination is so strong that even a yogi fully engagedin the service of the Lord sometimes becomes ensnared; but Krsnaconsciousness is so strong that such an occasional falldown is at oncerectified. Therefore the process of devotional service is always asuccess. No one should deride a devotee for some accidental falldownfrom the ideal path, for, as is explained in the next verse, suchoccasional falldowns will be stopped in due course, as soon as adevotee is completely situated in Krsna consciousness.Therefore a person who is situated in Krsna consciousness and isengaged with determination in the process of chanting Hare Krsna, HareKrsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare
Hare should be considered to be in the transcendental position, even if
by chance or accident he is found to have fallen. The words sadhur eva,"he is saintly," are very emphatic. They are a warning to thenondevotees that because of an accidental falldown a devotee should notbe derided; he should still be considered saintly even if he has fallendown accidentally. And the word mantavyah is still more emphatic. Ifone does not follow this rule, and derides a devotee for his accidentalfalldown, then he is disobeying the order of the Supreme Lord. The onlyqualification of a devotee is to be unflinchingly and exclusivelyengaged in devotional service.The mark of a spot which may be seen on the moon does not become animpediment to the moonlight. Similarly, the accidental falldown of adevotee from the path of a saintly character does not make himabominable. On the other hand, one should not misunderstand that adevotee in transcendental devotional service can act in all kinds ofabominable ways; this verse only refers to an accident due to thestrong power of material connections. Devotional service is more orless a declaration of war against the illusory energy. As long as oneis not strong enough to fight the illusory energy, there may beaccidental falldowns. But when one is strong enough, he is no longersubjected to such falldowns, as previously explained. No one shouldtake advantage of this verse and commit nonsense and think that he isstill a devotee. If he does not improve in his character by devotionalservice, then it is to be understood that he is not a high devotee.
TEXT 31
ksipram bhavati dharmatma
sasvac-chantim nigacchatikaunteya pratijanihina me bhaktah pranasyati
SYNONYMSksipram--very soon; bhavati--becomes; dharma-atma--righteous; sasvat-
santim--lasting peace; nigacchati--attains; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;pratijanihi--justly declare; na--never; me--Mine; bhaktah--devotees;pranasyati--perishes.
TRANSLATIONHe quickly becomes righteous and attains lasting peace. O son of Kunti,
declare it boldly that My devotee never perishes.
PURPORTThis should not be misunderstood. In the Seventh Chapter the Lord says
that one who is engaged in mischievous activities cannot become adevotee of the Lord. One who is not a devotee of the Lord has no goodqualifications whatsoever. The question remains, then, How can a personengaged in abominable activities--either by accident or intention--be apure devotee? This question may justly be raised. The miscreants, asstated in the Seventh Chapter, who never come to the devotional serviceof the Lord, have no good qualifications, as is stated in the Srimad-Bhagavatam. Generally, a devotee who is engaged in the nine kinds ofdevotional activities is engaged in the process of cleansing allmaterial contamination from the heart. He puts the Supreme Personalityof Godhead within his heart, and all sinful contaminations are
naturally washed away. Continuous thinking of the Supreme Lord makes
him pure by nature. According to the Vedas, there is a certainregulation that if one falls down from his exalted position, he has toundergo certain ritualistic processes to purify himself. But here thereis no such condition because the purifying process is already there inthe heart of the devotee, due to his remembering the SupremePersonality of Godhead constantly. Therefore, the chanting of HareKrsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, RamaRama, Hare Hare should be continued without stoppage. This will protecta devotee from all accidental falldowns. He will thus remainperpetually free from all material contaminations.
TEXT 32
mam hi partha vyapasritya
ye 'pi syuh papa-yonayahstriyo vaisyas tatha sudraste 'pi yanti param gatim
SYNONYMSmam--unto Me; hi--certainly; partha--O son of Prtha; vyapasritya--
particularly taking shelter; ye--anyone; api--also; syuh--becomes;papa-yonayah--born of a lower family; striyah--women; vaisyah--mercantile people; tatha--also; sudrah--lower-class men; te api--eventhey; yanti--go; param--supreme; gatim--destination.
TRANSLATIONO son of Prtha, those who take shelter in Me, though they be of lower
birth--women, vaisyas [merchants], as well as sudras [workers]--canapproach the supreme destination.
PURPORTIt is clearly declared here by the Supreme Lord that in devotional
service there is no distinction between the lower or higher classes ofpeople. In the material conception of life, there are such divisions,but for a person engaged in transcendental devotional service to theLord, there are not. Everyone is eligible for the supreme destination.In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (2.4.18) it is stated that even the lowest,who are called candalas (dog-eaters), can be elevated by associationwith a pure devotee. Therefore devotional service and guidance of apure devotee are so strong that there is no discrimination between thelower and higher classes of men; anyone can take to it. The most simpleman taking shelter of the pure devotee can be purified by properguidance. According to the different modes of material nature, men areclassified in the mode of goodness (brahmanas), the mode of passion(ksatriyas, or administrators), the mixed modes of passion andignorance (vaisyas, or merchants), and the mode of ignorance (sudras,or workers). Those lower than them are called candalas, and they areborn in sinful families. Generally, those who are born in sinfulfamilies are not accepted by the higher classes. But the process ofdevotional service and the pure devotee of the Supreme God are sostrong that all the lower classes can attain the highest perfection oflife. This is possible only when one takes shelter of Krsna. One has totake shelter completely of Krsna. Then one can become much greater thangreat jnanis and yogis.
TEXT 33
kim punar brahmanah punya
bhakta rajarsayas tathaanityam asukham lokamimam prapya bhajasva mam
SYNONYMSkim--how much; punah--again; brahmanah--brahmanas; punyah--righteous;
bhaktah--devotees; raja-rsayah--saintly kings; tatha--also; anityam--temporary; asukham--sorrowful; lokam--planet; imam--this; prapya--gaining; bhajasva--are engaged in loving service; mam--unto Me.
TRANSLATIONHow much greater then are the brahmanas, the righteous, the devotees
and saintly kings who in this temporary miserable world engage inloving service unto Me.
PURPORTIn this material world there are classifications of people, but, after
all, this world is not a happy place for anyone. It is clearly statedhere, anityam asukham lokam: this world is temporary and full ofmiseries, not habitable for any sane gentleman. This world is declaredby the Supreme Personality of Godhead to be temporary and full ofmiseries. Some of the philosophers, especially the minor philosophers,say that this world is false, but we can understand from Bhagavad-gitathat the world is not false; it is temporary. There is a differencebetween temporary and false. This world is temporary, but there isanother world, which is eternal. This world is miserable, but the otherworld is eternal and blissful.Arjuna was born in a saintly royal family. To him also the Lord says,"Take to My devotional service and come quickly back to Godhead, backhome." No one should remain in this temporary world, full as it is withmiseries. Everyone should attach himself to the bosom of the SupremePersonality of Godhead so that he can be eternally happy. Thedevotional service of the Supreme Lord is the only process by which allproblems of all classes of men can be solved. Everyone should thereforetake to Krsna consciousness and make his life perfect.
TEXT 34
man-mana bhava mad-bhakto
mad-yaji mam namaskurumam evaisyasi yuktvaivamatmanam mat-parayanah
SYNONYMSmat-manah--always thinking of Me; bhava--become; mat--My; bhaktah--
devotee; mat--My; yaji--worshiper; mam--unto Me; namaskuru--offerobeisances; mam--unto Me; eva--completely; esyasi--come; yuktva evam--being absorbed; atmanam--your soul; mat-parayanah--devoted to Me.
TRANSLATION
Engage your mind always in thinking of Me, offer obeisances and worship
Me. Being completely absorbed in Me, surely you will come to Me.
PURPORTIn this verse it is clearly indicated that Krsna consciousness is the
only means of being delivered from the clutches of this contaminatedmaterial world. Sometimes unscrupulous commentators distort the meaningof what is clearly stated here: that all devotional service should beoffered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. Unfortunately,unscrupulous commentators divert the mind of the reader to that whichis not at all feasible. Such commentators do not know that there is nodifference between Krsna's mind and Krsna. Krsna is not an ordinaryhuman being; He is Absolute Truth. His body, mind and He Himself areone and absolute. It is stated in the Kurma Purana, as it is quoted byBhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami in his Anubhasya comments on theCaitanya-caritamrta (Fifth Chapter, Adi-lila, verses 41-48), deha-dehi-vibhedo 'yam nesvare vidyate kvacit. This means that there is nodifference in Krsna, the Supreme Lord, between Himself and His body.But, because they do not know this science of Krsna, the commentatorshide Krsna and divide His personality from His mind or from His body.Although this is sheer ignorance of the science of Krsna, some men makeprofit out of misleading the people.There are some who are demonic; they also think of Krsna, butenviously, just like King Kamsa, Krsna's uncle. He was also thinking ofKrsna always, but he thought of Krsna as his enemy. He was always inanxiety, wondering when Krsna would come to kill him. That kind ofthinking will not help us. One should be thinking of Krsna indevotional love. That is bhakti. One should cultivate the knowledge ofKrsna continually. What is that favorable cultivation? It is to learnfrom a bona fide teacher. Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,and we have several times explained that His body is not material, butis eternal, blissful knowledge. This kind of talk about Krsna will helpone become a devotee. Otherwise, understanding Krsna from the wrongsource will prove fruitless.One should therefore engage his mind in the eternal form, the primalform of Krsna; with conviction in his heart that Krsna is the Supreme,he should engage himself in worship. There are hundreds of thousands oftemples in India for the worship of Krsna, and devotional service ispracticed there. When such practice is made, one has to offerobeisances to Krsna. One should lower his head before the Deity andengage his mind, his body, his activities--everything. That will makeone fully absorbed in Krsna without deviation. This will help onetransfer into the Krsnaloka. One should not be deviated by unscrupulouscommentators. One must engage in the nine different processes ofdevotional service, beginning with hearing and chanting about Krsna.Pure devotional service is the highest achievement of human society.In the Seventh and Eighth chapters of Bhagavad-gita, pure devotionalservice to the Lord has been explained, apart from the yoga ofknowledge and mystic yoga or fruitive activities. Those who are notpurely sanctified may be attracted by different features of the Lord,like the impersonal brahmajyoti and localized Paramatma, but a puredevotee directly takes to the service of the Supreme Lord.There is a beautiful poem about Krsna in which it is clearly statedthat any person who is engaged in the worship of demigods is mostunintelligent and cannot achieve at any time the supreme award ofKrsna. The devotee, in the beginning, may sometimes fall from the
standard, but still he should be considered superior to all other
philosophers and yogis. One who always engages in Krsna consciousnessshould be understood to be the perfect saintly person. His accidentalnondevotional activities will diminish, and he will soon be situatedwithout any doubt in complete perfection. The pure devotee has noactual chance to fall down because the Supreme Godhead personally takescare of His pure devotees. Therefore, the intelligent person shouldtake directly to this process of Krsna consciousness and happily livein this material world. He will eventually receive the supreme award ofKrsna.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Ninth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of the Most Confidential Knowledge.
“Bhagavad-gita As It Is ” by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of
this book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended forpersonal non-commercial use only, under the “fair use” guidelinesestablished by international copyright laws. You may use thiselectronic file to evaluate the printed version of this book, for yourown private use, or for short excerpts used in academic works,research, student papers, presentations, and the like. You candistribute this evaluation copy to others over the Internet, so long asyou keep this copyright information intact. You may not reproduce morethan ten percent (10%) of this book in any media without the expresswritten permission from the copyright holders. Reference any excerptsin the following way: “Excerpted from “Bhagavad-gita As It Is” by A.C.Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta BookTrust International, www.Krishna.com .”
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1972-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or toevaluate dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website ofthe publishers, www.Krishna.com .
Chapter 10
The Opulence of the Absolute
TEXT 1
sri-bhagavan uvaca
bhuya eva maha-bahosrnu me paramam vacahyat te 'ham priyamanayavaksyami hita-kamyaya
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; bhuyah--
again; eva--certainly; maha-baho--O mighty-armed; srnu--just hear; me--My; paramam--supreme; vacah--information; yat--that which; te--to you;
aham--I; priyamanaya--thinking you dear to Me; vaksyami--say; hita-
kamyaya--for your benefit.
TRANSLATIONThe Supreme Lord said: My dear friend, mighty-armed Arjuna, listen
again to My supreme word, which I shall impart to you for your benefitand which will give you great joy.
PURPORTThe word bhagavan is explained thus by Parasara Muni: one who is full
in six opulences, who has full strength, full fame, wealth, knowledge,beauty and renunciation, is Bhagavan, or the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. While Krsna was present on this earth, He displayed all sixopulences. Therefore great sages like Parasara Muni have all acceptedKrsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Now Krsna is instructingArjuna in more confidential knowledge of His opulences and His work.Previously, beginning with the Seventh Chapter, the Lord alreadyexplained His different energies and how they are acting. Now in thischapter He explains His specific opulences to Arjuna. In the previouschapter He has clearly explained His different energies to establishdevotion in firm conviction. Again in this chapter He tells Arjunaabout His manifestations and various opulences.The more one hears about the Supreme God, the more one becomes fixed indevotional service. One should always hear about the Lord in theassociation of devotees; that will enhance one's devotional service.Discourses in the society of devotees can take place only among thosewho are really anxious to be in Krsna consciousness. Others cannot takepart in such discourses. The Lord clearly tells Arjuna that because heis very dear to Him, for his benefit such discourses are taking place.
TEXT 2
na me viduh sura-ganah
prabhavam na maharsayahaham adir hi devanammaharsinam ca sarvasah
SYNONYMSna--never; me--My; viduh--knows; sura-ganah--demigods; prabhavam--
opulences; na--never; maha-rsayah--great sages; aham--I am; adih--theorigin; hi--certainly; devanam--of the demigods; maha-rsinam--of thegreat sages; ca--also; sarvasah--in all respects.
TRANSLATIONNeither the hosts of demigods nor the great sages know My origin, for,
in every respect, I am the source of the demigods and the sages.
PURPORTAs stated in the Brahma-samhita, Lord Krsna is the Supreme Lord. No one
is greater than Him; He is the cause of all causes. Here it is alsostated by the Lord personally that He is the cause of all the demigodsand sages. Even the demigods and great sages cannot understand Krsna;they can understand neither His name nor His personality, so what is
the position of the so-called scholars of this tiny planet? No one can
understand why this Supreme God comes to earth as an ordinary humanbeing and executes such commonplace and yet wonderful activities. Oneshould know, then, that scholarship is not the qualification necessaryto understand Krsna. Even the demigods and the great sages have triedto understand Krsna by their mental speculation, and they have failedto do so. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam also it is clearly said that eventhe great demigods are not able to understand the Supreme Personalityof Godhead. They can speculate to the limits of their imperfect sensesand can reach the opposite conclusion of impersonalism, of somethingnot manifested by the three qualities of material nature, or they canimagine something by mental speculation, but it is not possible tounderstand Krsna by such foolish speculation.Here the Lord indirectly says that if anyone wants to know the AbsoluteTruth, "Here I am present as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. I amthe Supreme." One should know this. Although one cannot understand theinconceivable Lord who is personally present, He nonetheless exists. Wecan actually understand Krsna, who is eternal, full of bliss andknowledge, simply by studying His words in Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam. The impersonal Brahman can be conceived by persons who arealready in the inferior energy of the Lord, but the Personality ofGodhead cannot be conceived unless one is in the transcendentalposition.Because most men cannot understand Krsna in His actual situation, outof His causeless mercy He descends to show favor to such speculators.Yet despite the Supreme Lord's uncommon activities, these speculators,due to contamination in the material energy, still think that theimpersonal Brahman is the Supreme. Only the devotees who are fullysurrendered unto the Supreme Lord can understand, by the grace of theSupreme Personality, that He is Krsna. The devotees of the Lord do notbother about the impersonal Brahman conception of God; their faith anddevotion bring them to surrender immediately unto the Supreme Lord, andout of the causeless mercy of Krsna, they can understand Krsna. No oneelse can understand Him. So even great sages agree: What is atma, whatis the Supreme? It is He whom we have to worship.
TEXT 3
yo mam ajam anadim ca
vetti loka-mahesvaramasammudhah sa martyesusarva-papaih pramucyate
SYNONYMSyah--anyone who; mam--unto Me; ajam--unborn; anadim--without beginning;
ca--also; vetti--knows; loka--the planets; maha-isvaram--the suprememaster; asammudhah--without doubt; sah--he; martyesu--among thosesubject to death; sarva-papaih--from all sinful reactions; pramucyate--is delivered.
TRANSLATIONHe who knows Me as the unborn, as the beginningless, as the Supreme
Lord of all the worlds--he, undeluded among men, is freed from allsins.
PURPORT
As stated in the Seventh Chapter (7.3), those who are trying to elevate
themselves to the platform of spiritual realization are not ordinarymen. They are superior to millions and millions of ordinary men whohave no knowledge of spiritual realization, but out of those actuallytrying to understand their spiritual situation, one who can come to theunderstanding that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, theproprietor of everything, the unborn, is the most successfulspiritually realized person. In that stage only, when one has fullyunderstood Krsna's supreme position, can one be free completely fromall sinful reactions.Here the word aja, meaning unborn, should not be confused with theliving entities, who are described in the Second Chapter as aja. TheLord is different from the living entities who are taking birth anddying due to material attachment. The conditioned souls are changingtheir bodies, but His body is not changeable. Even when He comes tothis material world, He comes as the same unborn; therefore in theFourth Chapter it is said that the Lord, by His internal potency, isnot under the inferior material energy, but is always in the superiorenergy.He was existing before the creation, and He is different from Hiscreation. All the demigods were created within this material world, butas far as Krsna is concerned, it is said that He is not created;therefore Krsna is different even from the great demigods like Brahmaand Siva. And because He is the creator of Brahma, Siva and all theother demigods, He is the Supreme Person of all planets.Sri Krsna is therefore different from everything that is created, andanyone who knows Him as such immediately becomes liberated from allsinful reaction. One must be liberated from all sinful activities to bein the knowledge of the Supreme Lord. Only by devotional service can Hebe known and not by any other means, as stated in Bhagavad-gita.One should not try to understand Krsna as a human being. As statedpreviously, only a foolish person thinks Him to be a human being. Thisis again expressed here in a different way. A man who is not foolish,who is intelligent enough to understand the constitutional position ofthe Godhead, is always free from all sinful reactions.If Krsna is known as the son of Devaki, then how can He be unborn? Thatis also explained in the Srimad-Bhagavatam: When He appeared beforeDevaki and Vasudeva, He was not born as an ordinary child; He appearedin His original form, and then He transformed Himself into an ordinarychild.Anything done under the direction of Krsna is transcendental. It cannotbe contaminated by the material reactions, which may be auspicious orinauspicious. The conception that there are things auspicious andinauspicious in the material world is more or less a mental concoctionbecause there is nothing auspicious in the material world. Everythingis inauspicious because the very material mask is inauspicious. Wesimply imagine it to be auspicious. Real auspiciousness depends onactivities in Krsna consciousness in full devotion and service.Therefore if we at all want our activities to be auspicious, then weshould work under the directions of the Supreme Lord. Such directionsare given in authoritative scriptures such as Srimad-Bhagavatam andBhagavad-gita, or from a bona fide spiritual master. Because thespiritual master is the representative of the Supreme Lord, hisdirection is directly the direction of the Supreme Lord. The spiritualmaster, saintly persons and scriptures direct in the same way. There isno contradiction in these three sources. All actions done under suchdirection are free from the reactions of pious or impious activities of
this material world. The transcendental attitude of the devotee in the
performance of activities is actually that of renunciation, and this iscalled sannyasa. Anyone acting under the direction of the Supreme Lordis actually a sannyasi and a yogi, and not the man who has simply takenthe dress of the sannyasi, or a pseudo yogi.
TEXTS 4-5
buddhir jnanam asammohah
ksama satyam damah samahsukham duhkham bhavo 'bhavobhayam cabhayam eva ca
ahimsa samata tustis
tapo danam yaso 'yasahbhavanti bhava bhutanammatta eva prthag-vidhah
SYNONYMSbuddhih--intelligence; jnanam--knowledge; asammohah--freedom from
doubt; ksama--forgiveness; satyam--truthfulness; damah--control of thesenses; samah--control of the mind; sukham--happiness; duhkham--distress; bhavah--birth; abhavah--death; bhayam--fear; ca--and;abhayam--without fear; eva--also; ca--and; ahimsa--nonviolence; samata--equilibrium; tustih--satisfaction; tapah--penance; danam--charity;yasah--fame; ayasah--infamy; bhavanti--become; bhavah--natures;bhutanam--of living entities; mattah--from Me; eva--certainly; prthak-vidhah--differently arranged.
TRANSLATIONIntelligence, knowledge, freedom from doubt and delusion, forgiveness,
truthfulness, self-control and calmness, pleasure and pain, birth,death, fear, fearlessness, nonviolence, equanimity, satisfaction,austerity, charity, fame and infamy are created by Me alone.
PURPORTThe different qualities of living entities, be they good or bad, are
all created by Krsna, and they are described here.Intelligence refers to the power of analyzing things in properperspective, and knowledge refers to understanding what is spirit andwhat is matter. Ordinary knowledge obtained by a university educationpertains only to matter, and it is not accepted here as knowledge.Knowledge means knowing the distinction between spirit and matter. Inmodern education there is no knowledge about the spirit; they aresimply taking care of the material elements and bodily needs. Thereforeacademic knowledge is not complete.Asammoha, freedom from doubt and delusion, can be achieved when one isnot hesitant and when he understands the transcendental philosophy.Slowly but surely he becomes free from bewilderment. Nothing should beaccepted blindly; everything should be accepted with care and withcaution. Ksama, forgiveness, should be practiced, and one should excusethe minor offenses of others. Satyam, truthfulness, means that factsshould be presented as they are for the benefit of others. Facts shouldnot be misrepresented. According to social conventions, it is said thatone can speak the truth only when it is palatable to others. But that
is not truthfulness. The truth should be spoken in a straightforward
way, so that others will understand actually what the facts are. If aman is a thief and if people are warned that he is a thief, that istruth. Although sometimes the truth is unpalatable, one should notrefrain from speaking it. Truthfulness demands that the facts bepresented as they are for the benefit of others. That is the definitionof truth.Self-control means that the senses should not be used for unnecessarypersonal enjoyment. There is no prohibition against meeting the properneeds of the senses but unnecessary sense enjoyment is detrimental forspiritual advancement. Therefore the senses should be restrained fromunnecessary use. Similarly, the mind should not indulge in unnecessarythoughts; that is called sama, or calmness. Nor should one spend one'stime pondering over earning money. That is a misuse of the thinkingpower. The mind should be used to understand the prime necessity ofhuman beings, and that should be presented authoritatively. The powerof thought should be developed in association with persons who areauthorities in the scriptures, saintly persons and spiritual mastersand those whose thinking is highly developed. Sukham, pleasure orhappiness, should always be in that which is favorable for thecultivation of the spiritual knowledge of Krsna consciousness. Andsimilarly, that which is painful or which causes distress is that whichis unfavorable for the cultivation of Krsna consciousness. Anythingfavorable for the development of Krsna consciousness should beaccepted, and anything unfavorable should be rejected.Bhava, birth, should be understood to refer to the body. As far as thesoul is concerned, there is neither birth nor death; that we havediscussed in the beginning of Bhagavad-gita. Birth and death apply toone's embodiment in the material world. Fear is due to worrying aboutthe future. A person in Krsna consciousness has no fear because by hisactivities he is sure to go back to the spiritual sky, back home, backto Godhead. Therefore his future is very bright. Others, however, donot know what their future holds; they have no knowledge of what thenext life holds. So they are therefore in constant anxiety. If we wantto get free from anxiety, then the best course is to understand Krsnaand be situated always in Krsna consciousness. In that way we will befree from all fear. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.2.37) it is statedthat fear is caused by our absorption in the illusory energy, but thosewho are free from the illusory energy, those who are confident thatthey are not the material body, that they are spiritual parts of theSupreme Personality of Godhead and are therefore engaged in thetranscendental service of the Supreme Godhead, have nothing to fear.Their future is very bright. This fear is a condition of persons whoare not in Krsna consciousness. Abhayam, fearlessness, is only possiblefor one in Krsna consciousness.Ahimsa, nonviolence, means that one should not do anything which willput others into misery or confusion. Material activities that arepromised by so many politicians, sociologists, philanthropists, etc.,do not produce very good results because the politicians andphilanthropists have no transcendental vision; they do not know what isactually beneficial for human society. Ahimsa means that people shouldbe trained in such a way that the full utilization of the human bodycan be achieved. The human body is meant for spiritual realization, soany movement or any commissions which do not further that end commitviolence on the human body. That which furthers the future spiritualhappiness of the people in general is called nonviolence.Samata, equanimity, refers to freedom from attachment and aversion. Tobe very much attached or to be very much detached is not the best. This
material world should be accepted without attachment or aversion.
Similarly, that which is favorable for prosecuting Krsna consciousnessshould be accepted; that which is unfavorable should be rejected. Thatis called samata, equanimity. A person in Krsna consciousness hasnothing to reject and nothing to accept unless it is useful in theprosecution of Krsna consciousness.Tusti, satisfaction, means that one should not be eager to gather moreand more material goods by unnecessary activity. One should besatisfied with whatever is obtained by the grace of the Supreme Lord;that is called satisfaction. Tapas means austerity or penance. Thereare many rules and definitions in the Vedas which apply here, likerising early in the morning and taking a bath. Sometimes it is verytroublesome to rise early in the morning, but whatever voluntarytrouble one may suffer in this way is called penance. Similarly, thereare prescriptions for fasting on certain days of the month. One may notbe inclined to practice such fasting, but because of his determinationto make advancement in the science of Krsna consciousness, he shouldaccept such bodily troubles which are recommended. However, one shouldnot fast unnecessarily or against Vedic injunctions. One should notfast for some political purpose; that is described in Bhagavad-gita asfasting in ignorance, and anything done in ignorance or passion doesnot lead to spiritual advancement. Everything done in the mode ofgoodness does advance one, however, and fasting done in terms of theVedic injunctions enriches one in spiritual knowledge.As far as charity is concerned, one should give fifty percent of hisearnings to some good cause. And what is a good cause? It is that whichis conducted in terms of Krsna consciousness. That is not only a goodcause, but it is the best cause. Because Krsna is good, His cause isalso good. Thus charity should be given to a person who is engaged inKrsna consciousness. According to Vedic literature, it is enjoined thatcharity should be given to the brahmanas. This practice is stillfollowed, although not very nicely in terms of the Vedic injunction.But still the injunction is that charity should be given to thebrahmanas. Why? Because they are engaged in higher cultivation ofspiritual knowledge. A brahmana is supposed to devote his whole life tounderstanding Brahman. A brahma-jana is one who knows Brahman; he iscalled a brahmana. Thus charity is offered to the brahmanas becausesince they are always engaged in higher spiritual service they have notime to earn their livelihood. In the Vedic literature, charity is alsoto be awarded to the renouncer of life, the sannyasi. The sannyasis begfrom door to door, not for money but for missionary purposes. Thesystem is that they go from door to door to awaken the householdersfrom the slumber of ignorance. Because the householders are engaged infamily affairs and have forgotten their actual purpose in life--awakening their Krsna consciousness--it is the business of thesannyasis to go as beggars to the householders and encourage them to beKrsna conscious. As it is said in the Vedas, one should awake andachieve what is due him in this human form of life. This knowledge andmethod is distributed by the sannyasis; hence charity is to be given tothe renouncer of life, to the brahmanas, and similar good causes, notto any whimsical cause.Yasas, fame, should be according to Lord Caitanya, who said that a manis famous when he is known as a great devotee. That is real fame. Ifone has become a great man in Krsna consciousness and it is known, thenhe is truly famous. One who does not have such fame is infamous.All these qualities are manifest throughout the universe in humansociety and in the society of the demigods. There are many forms ofhumanity on other planets, and these qualities are there. Now, for one
who wants to advance in Krsna consciousness, Krsna creates all these
qualities, but the person develops them himself from within. One whoengages in the devotional service of the Supreme Lord develops all thegood qualities, as arranged by the Supreme Lord.Of whatever we find, good or bad, the origin is Krsna. Nothing canmanifest in this material world which is not in Krsna. That isknowledge; although we know that things are differently situated, weshould realize that everything flows from Krsna.
TEXT 6
maharsayah sapta purve
catvaro manavas tathamad-bhava manasa jatayesam loka imah prajah
SYNONYMSmaha-rsayah--the great sages; sapta--seven; purve--before; catvarah--
four; manavah--Manus; tatha--also; mat-bhavah--born of Me; manasah--from the mind; jatah--born; yesam--of them; loke--the planets; imah--all this; prajah--population.
TRANSLATIONThe seven great sages and before them the four other great sages and
the Manus [progenitors of mankind] are born out of My mind, and allcreatures in these planets descend from them.
PURPORTThe Lord is giving a genealogical synopsis of the universal population.
Brahma is the original creature born out of the energy of the SupremeLord known as Hiranyagarbha. And from Brahma all the seven great sages,and before them four other great sages, namely Sanaka, Sananda,Sanatana and Sanat-kumara, and the Manus, are manifest. All thesetwenty-five great sages are known as the patriarchs of the livingentities all over the universe. There are innumerable universes andinnumerable planets within each universe, and each planet is full ofpopulation of different varieties. All of them are born of thesetwenty-five patriarchs. Brahma underwent penance for one thousand yearsof the demigods before he realized by the grace of Krsna how to create.Then from Brahma Sanaka, Sananda, Sanatana and Sanat-kumara came out,then Rudra, and then the seven sages, and in this way all the brahmanasand ksatriyas are born out of the energy of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. Brahma is known as Pitamaha, the grandfather, and Krsna isknown as the Prapitamaha, the father of the grandfather. That is statedin the Eleventh Chapter of the Bhagavad-gita (11.39).
TEXT 7
etam vibhutim yogam ca
mama yo vetti tattvatahso 'vikalpena yogenayujyate natra samsayah
SYNONYMS
etam--all this; vibhutim--opulence; yogam ca--also mystic power; mama--
of Mine; yah--anyone; vetti--knows; tattvatah--factual; sah--he;avikalpena--without division; yogena--in devotional service; yujyate--engaged; na--never; atra--here; samsayah--doubt.
TRANSLATIONHe who knows in truth this glory and power of Mine engages in unalloyed
devotional service; of this there is no doubt.
PURPORTThe highest summit of spiritual perfection is knowledge of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Unless one is firmly convinced of the differentopulences of the Supreme Lord, he cannot engage in devotional service.Generally people know that God is great, but they do not know in detailhow God is great. Here are the details. If one knows factually how Godis great, then naturally he becomes a surrendered soul and engageshimself in the devotional service of the Lord. When one factually knowsthe opulences of the Supreme, there is no alternative but to surrenderto Him. This factual knowledge can be known from the descriptions inSrimad-Bhagavatam and Bhagavad-gita and similar literatures.In the administration of this universe there are many demigodsdistributed throughout the planetary system, and the chief of them areBrahma, Lord Siva and the four great Kumaras and other patriarchs.There are many forefathers of the population of the universe, and allof them are born of the Supreme Lord Krsna. The Supreme Personality ofGodhead Krsna, is the original forefather of all forefathers.These are some of the opulences of the Supreme Lord. When one is firmlyconvinced of them, he accepts Krsna with great faith and without anydoubt, and he engages in devotional service. All this particularknowledge is required in order to increase one's interest in the lovingdevotional service of the Lord. One should not neglect to understandfully how great Krsna is, for by knowing the greatness of Krsna onewill be able to be fixed in sincere devotional service.
TEXT 8
aham sarvasya prabhavo
mattah sarvam pravartateiti matva bhajante mambudha bhava-samanvitah
SYNONYMSaham--I; sarvasya--of all; prabhavah--source of generation; mattah--
from Me; sarvam--everything; pravartate--emanates; iti--thus; matva--knowing; bhajante--becomes devoted; mam--unto Me; budhah--learned;bhava-samanvitah--with great attention.
TRANSLATIONI am the source of all spiritual and material worlds. Everything
emanates from Me. The wise who know this perfectly engage in Mydevotional service and worship Me with all their hearts.
PURPORT
A learned scholar who has studied the Vedas perfectly and has
information from authorities like Lord Caitanya and who knows how toapply these teachings can understand that Krsna is the origin ofeverything in both the material and spiritual worlds, and because heknows this perfectly he becomes firmly fixed in the devotional serviceof the Supreme Lord. He can never be deviated by any amount ofnonsensical commentaries or by fools. All Vedic literature agrees thatKrsna is the source of Brahma, Siva and all other demigods. In theAtharva Veda (Gopala-tapani Upanisad 1.24) it is said, yo brahmanamvidadhati purvam yo vai vedams ca gapayati sma krsnah: "It was Krsnawho in the beginning instructed Brahma in Vedic knowledge and whodisseminated Vedic knowledge in the past." Then again the NarayanaUpanisad says,(1) atha puruso ha vai narayano 'kamayata prajahsrjeyeti: "Then the Supreme Personality Narayana desired to createliving entities." Again it is said, narayanad brahma jayate, narayanadprajapatih prajayate, narayanad indro jayate, narayanad astau vasavojayante, narayanad ekadasa rudra jayante, narayanad dvadasadityah:"From Narayana, Brahma is born, and from Narayana, the patriarchs arealso born. From Narayana, Indra is born, from Narayana the eight Vasusare born, from Narayana the eleven Rudras are born, from Narayana thetwelve Adityas are born."It is said in the same Vedas, brahmanyo devaki-putrah: "The son ofDevaki, Krsna, is the Supreme Personality." (Narayana Upanisad 4) Thenit is said:
eko vai narayana asin na brahma na isano napo nagni samau neme
dyav-aprthivi na naksatrani na suryah sa ekaki na ramate tasyadhyanantah sthasya yatra chandogaih kriyamanastakadi-samjnakastuti-stomah stomam ucyate.
"In the beginning of the creation there was only the Supreme
Personality Narayana. There was no Brahma, no Siva, no fire, no moon,no stars in the sky, no sun. There was only Krsna, who creates all andenjoys all" (Maha Upanisad 1)In the Maha Upanisad it is said that Lord Siva was born from thehighest, the Supreme Lord Krsna, and the Vedas say that it is theSupreme Lord, the creator of Brahma and Siva, who is to be worshiped.In the Moksa-dharma Krsna also says,
prajapatim ca rudram capy
aham eva srjami vaitau hi mam na vijanitomama maya-vimohitau
"The patriarchs, Siva and others are created by Me, though they do not
know that they are created by Me because they are deluded by Myillusory energy." In the Varaha Purana it is also said,
narayanah paro devas
tasmaj jatas caturmukhahtasmad rudro 'bhavad devahsa ca sarva-jnatam gatah
"Narayana is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and from Him Brahma
was born, from whom Siva was born."Lord Krsna is the source of all generations, and He is called the mostefficient cause of everything. He says that because "everything is bornof Me, I am the original source of all. Everything is under Me; no one
is above Me." There is no supreme controller other than Krsna. One who
understands Krsna in such a way from a bona fide spiritual master andfrom Vedic literature, who engages all his energy in Krsnaconsciousness, becomes a truly learned man. In comparison to him, allothers, who do not know Krsna properly, are but fools. Only a foolwould consider Krsna to be an ordinary man. A Krsna conscious personshould not be bewildered by fools; he should avoid all unauthorizedcommentaries and interpretations on Bhagavad-gita and proceed in Krsnaconsciousness with determination and firmness.
TEXT 9
mac-citta mad-gata-prana
bodhayantah parasparamkathayantas ca mam nityamtusyanti ca ramanti ca
SYNONYMSmat-cittah--minds fully engaged in Me; mat-gata-pranah--lives devoted
to the service of Krsna; bodhayantah--preaching; parasparam--amongthemselves; kathayantah ca--talking also; mam--about Me; nityam--perpetually; tusyanti--are pleased; ca--also; ramanti--enjoytranscendental bliss; ca--also.
TRANSLATIONThe thoughts of My pure devotees dwell in Me, their lives are
surrendered to Me, and they derive great satisfaction and blissenlightening one another and conversing about Me.
PURPORTPure devotees, whose characteristics are mentioned here, engage
themselves fully in the transcendental loving service of the Lord.Their minds cannot be diverted from the lotus feet of Krsna. Theirtalks are solely on the transcendental subjects. The symptoms of thepure devotees are described in this verse specifically. Devotees of theSupreme Lord are twenty-four hours daily engaged in glorifying thepastimes of the Supreme Lord. Their hearts and souls are constantlysubmerged in Krsna, and they take pleasure in discussing Him with otherdevotees.In the preliminary stage of devotional service they relish thetranscendental pleasure from the service itself, and in the maturestage they are actually situated in love of God. Once situated in thattranscendental position, they can relish the highest perfection whichis exhibited by the Lord in His abode. Lord Caitanya likenstranscendental devotional service to the sowing of a seed in the heartof the living entity. There are innumerable living entities travelingthroughout the different planets of the universe, and out of them thereare a few who are fortunate enough to meet a pure devotee and get thechance to understand devotional service. This devotional service isjust like a seed, and if it is sown in the heart of a living entity,and if he goes on hearing and chanting, Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, KrsnaKrsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, that seedfructifies, just as the seed of a tree fructifies with regularwatering. The spiritual plant of devotional service gradually grows andgrows until it penetrates the covering of the material universe and
enters into the brahmajyoti effulgence in the spiritual sky. In the
spiritual sky also that plant grows more and more until it reaches thehighest planet, which is called Goloka Vrndavana, the supreme planet ofKrsna. Ultimately, the plant takes shelter under the lotus feet ofKrsna and rests there. Gradually as the plant grows fruits and flowers,that plant of devotional service also produces fruits, and the wateringprocess in the form of chanting and hearing goes on. This plant ofdevotional service is fully described in the Caitanya-caritamrta(Madhya-lila, Chapter Nineteen). It is explained there that when thecomplete plant takes shelter under the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord,one becomes fully absorbed in love of God; then he cannot live even fora moment without being in contact with the Supreme Lord, just as a fishcannot live without water. In such a state, the devotee actuallyattains the transcendental qualities in contact with the Supreme Lord.The Srimad-Bhagavatam is also full of such narrations about therelationship between the Supreme Lord and His devotees; therefore theSrimad-Bhagavatam is very dear to the devotees. In this narration thereis nothing about material activities, sense gratification orliberation. Srimad-Bhagavatam is the only narration in which thetranscendental nature of the Supreme Lord and His devotees is fullydescribed. Thus the realized souls in Krsna consciousness takecontinual pleasure in hearing such transcendental literatures, just asa young boy and girl take pleasure in association.
TEXT 10
tesam satata-yuktanam
bhajatam priti-purvakamdadami buddhi-yogam tamyena mam upayanti te
SYNONYMStesam--unto them; satata-yuktanam--always engaged; bhajatam--in
devotional service; priti-purvakam--in loving ecstasy; dadami--I give;buddhi-yogam--real intelligence; tam--that; yena--by which; mam--untoMe; upayanti--come; te--they.
TRANSLATIONTo those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, I give
the understanding by which they can come to Me.
PURPORTIn this verse the word buddhi-yogam is very significant. We may
remember that in the Second Chapter the Lord, instructing Arjuna, saidthat He had spoken to him of many things and that He would instruct himin the way of buddhi-yoga. Now buddhi-yoga is explained. Buddhi-yogaitself is action in Krsna consciousness; that is the highestintelligence. Buddhi means intelligence, and yoga means mysticactivities or mystic elevation. When one tries to go back home, back toGodhead, and takes fully to Krsna consciousness in devotional service,his action is called buddhi yoga. In other words, buddhi-yoga is theprocess by which one gets out of the entanglement of this materialworld. The ultimate goal of progress is Krsna. People do not know this;therefore the association of devotees and a bona fide spiritual masterare important. One should know that the goal is Krsna, and when the
goal is assigned, then the path is slowly but progressively traversed,
and the ultimate goal is achieved.When a person knows the goal of life but is addicted to the fruits ofactivities, he is acting in karma-yoga. When he knows that the goal isKrsna, but he takes pleasure in mental speculations to understandKrsna, he is acting in jnana-yoga. And when he knows the goal and seeksKrsna completely in Krsna consciousness and devotional service, he isacting in bhakti-yoga, or buddhi-yoga, which is the complete yoga. Thiscomplete yoga is the highest perfectional stage of life.A person may have a bona fide spiritual master and may be attached to aspiritual organization, but still, if he is not intelligent enough tomake progress, then Krsna from within gives him instructions so that hemay ultimately come to Him without difficulty. The qualification isthat a person always engage himself in Krsna consciousness and withlove and devotion render all kinds of services. He should perform somesort of work for Krsna, and that work should be with love. If a devoteeis intelligent enough he will make progress on the path of self-realization. If one is sincere and devoted to the activities ofdevotional service, the Lord gives him a chance to make progress andultimately attain to Him.
TEXT 11
tesam evanukampartham
aham ajnana-jam tamahnasayamy atma-bhavasthojnana-dipena bhasvata
SYNONYMStesam--for them; eva--certainly; anukampa-artham--to show special
mercy; aham--I; ajnana-jam--due to ignorance; tamah--darkness;nasayami--dispel; atma--within; bhavasthah--themselves; jnana--ofknowledge; dipena--with the lamp; bhasvata--glowing.
TRANSLATIONOut of compassion for them, I, dwelling in their hearts, destroy with
the shining lamp of knowledge the darkness born of ignorance.
PURPORTWhen Lord Caitanya was in Benares promulgating the chanting of Hare
Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, RamaRama, Hare Hare, thousands of people were following Him. Prakasananda,a very influential and learned scholar in Benares at that time, deridedLord Caitanya for being a sentimentalist. Sometimes philosopherscriticize the devotees because they think that most of the devotees arein the darkness of ignorance and are philosophically naivesentimentalists. Actually that is not the fact. There are very, verylearned scholars who have put forward the philosophy of devotion, buteven if a devotee does not take advantage of their literatures or ofhis spiritual master, if he is sincere in his devotional service he ishelped by Krsna Himself within his heart. So the sincere devoteeengaged in Krsna consciousness cannot be without knowledge. The onlyqualification is that one carry out devotional service in full Krsnaconsciousness.
The modern philosophers think that without discriminating one cannot
have pure knowledge. For them this answer is given by the Supreme Lord:those who are engaged in pure devotional service, even though they bewithout sufficient education and even without sufficient knowledge ofthe Vedic principles, are still helped by the Supreme God, as stated inthis verse.The Lord tells Arjuna that basically there is no possibility ofunderstanding the Supreme Truth, the Absolute Truth, the SupremePersonality of Godhead, simply by speculating, for the Supreme Truth isso great that it is not possible to understand Him or to achieve Himsimply by making a mental effort. Man can go on speculating for severalmillions of years, and if he is not devoted, if he is not a lover ofthe Supreme Truth, he will never understand Krsna or the Supreme Truth.Only by devotional service is the Supreme Truth, Krsna, pleased and byHis inconceivable energy He can reveal Himself to the heart of the puredevotee. The pure devotee always has Krsna within his heart; thereforehe is just like the sun that dissipates the darkness of ignorance. Thisis the special mercy rendered to the pure devotee by Krsna.Due to the contamination of material association, through many, manymillions of births, one's heart is always covered with the dust ofmaterialism, but when one engages in devotional service and constantlychants Hare Krsna, the dust quickly clears and one is elevated to theplatform of pure knowledge. The ultimate goal of Visnu can be attainedonly by this chant and devotional service, and not by mentalspeculation or argument. The pure devotee does not have to worry aboutthe necessities of life; he need not be anxious because when he removesthe darkness from his heart, everything is provided automatically bythe Supreme Lord, for He is pleased by the loving devotional service ofthe devotee. This is the essence of the Gita's teachings. By studyingBhagavad-gita, one can become a completely surrendered soul to theSupreme Lord and engage himself in pure devotional service. As the Lordtakes charge, one becomes completely free from all kinds ofmaterialistic endeavors.
TEXTS 12-13
arjuna uvaca
param brahma param dhamapavitram paramam bhavanpurusam sasvatam divyamadi-devam ajam vibhum
ahus tvam rsayah sarve
devarsir naradas tathaasito devalo vyasahsvayam caiva bravisi me
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; param--supreme; brahma--truth; param--
supreme; dhama--sustenance; pavitram--purest; paramam--supreme; bhavan--Yourself; purusam--personality; sasvatam--original; divyam--transcendental; adi-devam--original Lord; ajam--unborn; vibhum--greatest; ahuh--say; tvam--unto You; rsayah--sages; sarve--all; deva-rsih--the sage among the demigods; naradah--Narada; tatha--also;asitah--Asita; devalah--Devala; vyasah--Vyasa; svayam--personally; ca--also; eva--certainly; bravisi--explaining; me--unto me.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: You are the Supreme Brahman, the ultimate, the supreme
abode and purifier, the Absolute Truth and the eternal divine person.You are the primal God, transcendental and original, and You are theunborn and all-pervading beauty. All the great sages such as Narada,Asita, Devala, and Vyasa proclaim this of You, and now You Yourself aredeclaring it to me.
PURPORTIn these two verses the Supreme Lord gives a chance to the modern
philosopher, for here it is clear that the Supreme is different fromthe individual soul. Arjuna, after hearing the essential four verses ofBhagavad-gita in this chapter, became completely free from all doubtsand accepted Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He at onceboldly declares, "You are param brahma, the Supreme Personality ofGodhead." And previously Krsna stated that He is the originator ofeverything and everyone. Every demigod and every human being isdependent on Him. Men and demigods, out of ignorance, think that theyare absolute and independent of the Supreme Lord Krsna. That ignoranceis removed perfectly by the discharge of devotional service. This isalready explained in the previous verse by the Lord. Now by His grace,Arjuna is accepting Him as the Supreme Truth, in concordance with theVedic injunction. It is not because Krsna is an intimate friend ofArjuna that he is flattering Him by calling Him the Supreme Personalityof Godhead, the Absolute Truth. Whatever Arjuna says in these twoverses is confirmed by Vedic truth. Vedic injunctions affirm that onlyone who takes to devotional service to the Supreme Lord can understandHim, whereas others cannot. Each and every word of this verse spoken byArjuna is confirmed by Vedic injunction.In the Kena Upanisad it is stated that the Supreme Brahman is the restfor everything, and Krsna has already explained that everything isresting on Him. The Mundaka Upanisad confirms that the Supreme Lord, inwhom everything is resting, can be realized only by those who engageconstantly in thinking of Him. This constant thinking of Krsna issmaranam, one of the methods of devotional service. It is only bydevotional service to Krsna that one can understand his position andget rid of this material body.In the Vedas the Supreme Lord is accepted as the purest of the pure.One who understands that Krsna is the purest of the pure can becomepurified from all sinful activities. One cannot be disinfected fromsinful activities unless he surrenders unto the Supreme Lord. Arjuna'sacceptance of Krsna as the supreme pure complies with the injunctionsof Vedic literature. This is also confirmed by great personalities, ofwhom Narada is the chief.Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and one should alwaysmeditate upon Him and enjoy one's transcendental relationship with Him.He is the supreme existence. He is free from bodily needs, birth anddeath. Not only does Arjuna confirm this, but all the Vedicliteratures, the Puranas and histories. In all Vedic literatures Krsnais thus described, and the Supreme Lord Himself also says in the FourthChapter, "Although I am unborn, I appear on this earth to establishreligious principles." He is the supreme origin; He has no cause, forHe is the cause of all causes, and everything is emanating from Him.This perfect knowledge can be had by the grace of the Supreme Lord.Here Arjuna expresses himself through the grace of Krsna. If we want tounderstand Bhagavad-gita, we should accept the statements in these two
verses. This is called the parampara system, acceptance of the
disciplic succession. Unless one is in the disciplic succession, hecannot understand Bhagavad-gita. It is not possible by so-calledacademic education. Unfortunately those proud of their academiceducation, despite so much evidence in Vedic literatures, stick totheir obstinate conviction that Krsna is an ordinary person.
TEXT 14
sarvam etad rtam manye
yan mam vadasi kesavana hi te bhagavan vyaktimvidur deva na danavah
SYNONYMSsarvam--all; etat--these; rtam--truths; manye--accept; yat--which; mam-
-unto me; vadasi--You tell; kesava--O Krsna; na--never; hi--certainly;te--Your; bhagavan--O Personality of Godhead; vyaktim--revelation;viduh--can know; devah--the demigods; na--nor; danavah--the demons.
TRANSLATIONO Krsna, I totally accept as truth all that You have told me. Neither
the gods nor demons, O Lord, know Thy personality.
PURPORTArjuna herein confirms that persons of faithless and demonic nature
cannot understand Krsna. He is not even known by the demigods, so whatto speak of the so-called scholars of this modern world? By the graceof the Supreme Lord, Arjuna has understood that the Supreme Truth isKrsna and that He is the perfect one. One should therefore follow thepath of Arjuna. He received the authority of Bhagavad-gita. Asdescribed in the Fourth Chapter, the parampara system of disciplicsuccession for the understanding of Bhagavad-gita was lost, andtherefore Krsna reestablished that disciplic succession with Arjunabecause He considered Arjuna His intimate friend and a great devotee.Therefore, as stated in our Introduction to Gitopanisad, Bhagavad-gitashould be understood in the parampara system. When the parampara systemwas lost, Arjuna was again selected to rejuvenate it. The acceptance ofArjuna of all that Krsna says should be emulated; then we canunderstand the essence of Bhagavad-gita, and then only can weunderstand that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 15
svayam evatmanatmanam
vettha tvam purusottamabhuta-bhavana bhutesadeva-deva jagat-pate
SYNONYMSsvayam--personality; eva--certainly; atmana--by Yourself; atmanam--
Yourself; vettha--know; tvam--You; purusa-uttama--O greatest of allpersons; bhuta-bhavana--O origin of everything; bhuta-isa--O Lord of
everything; deva-deva--O Lord of all demigods; jagat-pate--O Lord of
the entire universe.
TRANSLATIONIndeed, You alone know Yourself by Your own potencies, O origin of all,
Lord of all beings, God of gods, O Supreme Person, Lord of theuniverse!
PURPORTThe Supreme Lord Krsna can be known by persons who are in a
relationship with Him through the discharge of devotional service, likeArjuna and his followers. Persons of demonic or atheistic mentalitycannot know Krsna. Mental speculation that leads one away from theSupreme Lord is a serious sin, and one who does not know Krsna shouldnot try to comment on Bhagavad-gita. Bhagavad-gita is the statement ofKrsna, and since it is the science of Krsna, it should be understoodfrom Krsna as Arjuna understood it. It should not be received fromatheistic persons.The Supreme Truth is realized in three aspects: as impersonal Brahman,localized Paramatma and at last as the Supreme Personality of Godhead.So at the last stage of understanding the Absolute Truth, one comes tothe Supreme Personality of Godhead. A liberated man and even a commonman may realize impersonal Brahman or localized Paramatma, yet they maynot understand God's personality from the verses of Bhagavad-gita,which are being spoken by this person, Krsna. Sometimes theimpersonalists accept Krsna as Bhagavan, or they accept His authority.Yet many liberated persons cannot understand Krsna as Purusottama, theSupreme Person, the father of all living entities. Therefore Arjunaaddresses Him as Purusottama. And if one comes to know Him as thefather of all the living entities, still one may not know Him as thesupreme controller; therefore He is addressed here as Bhutesa, thesupreme controller of everyone. And even if one knows Krsna as thesupreme controller of all living entities, still one may not know thatHe is the origin of all the demigods; therefore He is addressed hereinas Devadeva, the worshipful God of all demigods. And even if one knowsHim as the worshipful God of all demigods, one may not know that He isthe supreme proprietor of everything; therefore He is addressed asJagatpati. Thus the truth about Krsna is established in this verse bythe realization of Arjuna, and we should follow in the footsteps ofArjuna to understand Krsna as He is.
TEXT 16
vaktum arhasy asesena
divya hy atma-vibhutayahyabhir vibhutibhir lokanimams tvam vyapya tisthasi
SYNONYMSvaktum--to say; arhasi--deserve; asesena--in detail; divyah--divine;
hi--certainly; atma--Yourself; vibhutayah--opulences; yabhih--by which;vibhutibhih--opulences; lokan--all the planets; iman--these; tvam--You;vyapya--pervading; tisthasi--remain.
TRANSLATION
Please tell me in detail of Your divine powers by which You pervade all
these worlds and abide in them.
PURPORTIn this verse it appears that Arjuna is already satisfied with his
understanding of the Supreme Lord Krsna. By Krsna's grace, Arjuna haspersonal experience, intelligence and knowledge and whatever else aperson may have through all these agencies, and he has understood Krsnaas the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For him there is no doubt, yethe is asking Krsna to explain His all-pervading nature so that in thefuture people will understand, especially the impersonalists, how Heexists in His all-pervading aspect through His different energies. Oneshould know that this is being asked by Arjuna on behalf of the commonpeople.
TEXT 17
katham vidyam aham yogims
tvam sada paricintayankesu kesu ca bhavesucintyo 'si bhagavan maya
SYNONYMSkatham--how; vidyam aham--shall I know; yogin--O supreme mystic; tvam--
You; sada--always; paricintayan--thinking; kesu--in which; kesu--inwhich; ca--also; bhavesu--nature; cintyah asi--You are remembered;bhagavan--O Supreme; maya--by me.
TRANSLATIONHow shall I meditate on You? In what various forms are You to be
remembered, O Blessed Lord?
PURPORTAs it is stated in the previous chapter, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is covered by His yoga-maya. Only surrendered souls anddevotees can see Him. Now Arjuna is convinced that His friend, Krsna,is the Supreme Godhead, but he wants to know the general process bywhich the all-pervading Lord can be understood by the common man. Nocommon men, including the demons and atheists, can know Krsna becauseHe is guarded by His yoga-maya energy. Again, these questions are askedby Arjuna for their benefit. The superior devotee is not only concernedfor his own understanding, but for the understanding of all mankind.Out of his mercy, because he is a Vaisnava, a devotee, Arjuna isopening the understanding for the common man as far as the all-pervasiveness of the Supreme is concerned. He addresses Krsnaspecifically as yogin because Sri Krsna is the master of the yoga-mayaenergy by which He is covered and uncovered to the common man. Thecommon man who has no love for Krsna cannot always think of Krsna;therefore he has to think materially. Arjuna is considering the mode ofthinking of the materialistic persons of this world. Becausematerialists cannot understand Krsna spiritually, they are advised toconcentrate the mind on physical things and try to see how Krsna ismanifested by physical representations.
TEXT 18
vistarenatmano yogam
vibhutim ca janardanabhuyah kathaya trptir hisrnvato nasti me 'mrtam
SYNONYMSvistarena--in description; atmanah--of Yourself; yogam--mystic power;
vibhutim--opulences; ca--also; jana-ardana--O killer of the atheists;bhuyah--again; kathaya--describe; trptih--satisfaction; hi--certainly;srnvatah--hearing; na asti--there is not; me--my; amrtam--nectar.
TRANSLATIONTell me again in detail, O Janardana [Krsna], of Your mighty potencies
and glories, for I never tire of hearing Your ambrosial words.
PURPORTA similar statement was made to Suta Gosvami by the rsis of
Naimisaranya, headed by Saunaka. That statement is:
vayam tu na vitrpyama
uttama-sloka-vikrameyac chrnvatam rasa-jnanamsvadu svadu pade pade
"One can never be satiated even though one continuously hears the
transcendental pastimes of Krsna, who is glorified by Vedic hymns.Those who have entered into a transcendental relationship with Krsnarelish in every step descriptions of the pastimes of the Lord."(Srimad-Bhagavatam 1.1.19) Thus Arjuna is interested to hear aboutKrsna, specifically how He remains as the all-pervading Supreme Lord.Now as far as amrtam, nectar, is concerned, any narration or statementconcerning Krsna is just like nectar. And this nectar can be perceivedby practical experience. Modern stories, fiction and histories aredifferent from the transcendental pastimes of the Lord in that one willtire of hearing mundane stories, but one never tires of hearing aboutKrsna. It is for this reason only that the history of the wholeuniverse is replete with references to the pastimes of the incarnationsof Godhead. For instance, the Puranas are histories of bygone ages thatrelate the pastimes of the various incarnations of the Lord. In thisway the reading matter remains forever fresh, despite repeatedreadings.
TEXT 19
sri-bhagavan uvaca
hanta te kathayisyamidivya hy atma-vibhutayahpradhanyatah kuru-sresthanasty anto vistarasya me
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; hanta--
yes; te--unto you; kathayisyami--I shall speak; divyah--divine; hi--certainly; atma-vibhutayah--personal opulences; pradhanyatah--principally; kuru-srestha--O best of the Kurus; na asti--there is no;antah--limit; vistarasya--to the extent; me--My.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: Yes, I will tell you of My splendorous
manifestations, but only of those which are prominent, O Arjuna, for Myopulence is limitless.
PURPORTIt is not possible to comprehend the greatness of Krsna and His
opulences. The senses of the individual soul are imperfect and do notpermit him to understand the totality of Krsna's affairs. Still thedevotees try to understand Krsna, but not on the principle that theywill be able to understand Krsna fully at any specific time or in anystate of life. Rather, the very topics of Krsna are so relishable thatthey appear to them as nectar. Thus they enjoy them. In discussingKrsna's opulences and His diverse energies, the pure devotees taketranscendental pleasure. Therefore they want to hear and discuss them.Krsna knows that living entities do not understand the extent of Hisopulences; He therefore agrees to state only the principalmanifestations of His different energies. The word pradhanyatah(principal) is very important because we can understand only a few ofthe principal details of the Supreme Lord, for His features areunlimited. It is not possible to understand them all. And vibhuti, asused in this verse, refers to the opulences by which He controls thewhole manifestation. In the Amara-kosa dictionary it is stated thatvibhuti indicates an exceptional opulence.The impersonalist or the pantheist cannot understand the exceptionalopulences of the Supreme Lord nor the manifestations of His divineenergy. Both in the material world and in the spiritual world Hisenergies are distributed in every variety of manifestation. Now Krsnais describing what can be directly perceived by the common man; thuspart of His variegated energy is described in this way.
TEXT 20
aham atma gudakesa
sarva-bhutasaya-sthitahaham adis ca madhyam cabhutanam anta eva ca
SYNONYMSaham--I; atma--soul; gudakesa--O Arjuna; sarva-bhuta--all living
entities; asaya-sthitah--situated within; aham--I am; adih--origin; ca--also; madhyam--middle; ca--also; bhutanam--all living entities; antah--end; eva--certainly; ca--and.
TRANSLATIONI am the Self, O Gudakesa, seated in the hearts of all creatures. I am
the beginning, the middle and the end of all beings.
PURPORT
In this verse Arjuna is addressed as Gudakesa, which means one who has
conquered the darkness of sleep. For those who are sleeping in thedarkness of ignorance it is not possible to understand how the SupremePersonality of Godhead manifests Himself in the material and spiritualworlds. Thus this address by Krsna to Arjuna is significant. BecauseArjuna is above such darkness, the Personality of Godhead agrees todescribe His various opulences.Krsna first informs Arjuna that He is the Self or soul of the entirecosmic manifestation by dint of His primary expansion. Before thematerial creation, the Supreme Lord, by His plenary expansion, acceptsthe purusa incarnations, and from Him everything begins. Therefore Heis atma, the soul of the mahat-tattva, the universal elements. Thetotal material energy is not the cause of the creation but actually theMaha-Visnu enters into the mahat-tattva, the total material energy. Heis the soul. When Maha-Visnu enters into the manifested universes, Heagain manifests Himself as the Supersoul in each and every entity. Wehave experience that the personal body of the living entity exists dueto the presence of the spiritual spark. Without the existence of thespiritual spark, the body cannot develop. Similarly, the materialmanifestation cannot develop unless the Supreme Soul of Krsna enters.The Supreme Personality of Godhead is existing as the Supersoul in allmanifested universes. A description of the three purusa-avataras isgiven in Srimad-Bhagavatam: "The Supreme Personality of Godheadmanifests three features, as Karanodakasayi Visnu, Garbhodakasayi Visnuand Ksirodakasayi Visnu, in this material manifestation." The SupremeLord, Krsna, the cause of all causes, lies down in the cosmic ocean asMaha-Visnu or Karanodakasayi Visnu, and therefore Krsna is thebeginning of this universe, the maintainer of the universalmanifestation, and the end of all the energy.
TEXT 21
adityanam aham visnur
jyotisam ravir amsumanmaricir marutam asminaksatranam aham sasi
SYNONYMSadityanam--of the Adityas; aham--I am; visnuh--the Supreme Lord;
jyotisam--of all luminaries; ravih--the sun; amsu-man--radiant;maricih--Marici; marutam--of the Maruts; asmi--I am; naksatranam--ofstars; aham--I am; sasi--the moon.
TRANSLATIONOf the Adityas I am Visnu, of lights I am the radiant sun, I am Marici
of the Maruts, and among the stars I am the moon.
PURPORTThere are twelve Adityas, of which Krsna is the principal. And among
all the luminaries twinkling in the sky, the sun is the chief, and inthe Brahma-samhita the sun is accepted as the glowing effulgence of theSupreme Lord and is considered to be one of His eyes. Marici is the
controlling deity of of the heavenly spaces. Among the stars, the moon
is the most prominent at night, and thus the moon represents Krsna.TEXT 22
vedanam sama-vedo 'smi
devanam asmi vasavahindriyanam manas casmibhutanam asmi cetana
SYNONYMSvedanam--of all the Vedas; sama-vedah--the Sama Veda; asmi--I am;
devanam--of all the demigods; asmi--I am; vasavah--heavenly king;indriyanam--of all the senses; manah--the mind; ca--also; asmi--I am;bhutanam--of all living entities; asmi--I am; cetana--the living force.
TRANSLATIONOf the Vedas I am the Sama Veda; of the demigods I am Indra; of the
senses I am the mind, and in living beings I am the living force[knowledge].
PURPORTThe difference between matter and spirit is that matter has no
consciousness like the living entity; therefore this consciousness issupreme and eternal. Consciousness cannot be produced by a combinationof matter.
TEXT 23
rudranam sankaras casmi
vitteso yaksa-raksasamvasunam pavakas casmimeruh sikharinam aham
SYNONYMSrudranam--of all the Rudras; sankarah--Lord Siva; ca--also; asmi--I am;
vitta-isah--the lord of the treasury of the demigods; yaksa-raksasam--of the Yaksas and Raksasas; vasunam--of the Vasus; pavakah--fire; ca--also; asmi--I am; meruh--Meru; sikharinam--of all mountains; aham--Iam.
TRANSLATIONOf all the Rudras I am Lord Siva; of the Yaksas and Raksasas I am the
Lord of wealth [Kuvera]; of the Vasus I am fire [Agni], and ofmountains I am Meru.
PURPORTThere are eleven Rudras, of whom Sankara, Lord Siva, is predominant. He
is the incarnation of the Supreme Lord in charge of the mode ofignorance in the universe. Among the demigods Kuvera is the chieftreasurer, and he is a representation of the Supreme Lord. Meru is amountain famed for its rich natural resources.
TEXT 24
purodhasam ca mukhyam mam
viddhi partha brhaspatimsenaninam aham skandahsarasam asmi sagarah
SYNONYMSpurodhasam--of all priests; ca--also; mukhyam--chief; mam--Me; viddhi--
understand; partha--O son of Prtha; brhaspatim--Brhaspati; senaninam--of all commanders; aham--I am; skandah--Kartikeya; sarasam--of allreservoirs of water; asmi--I am; sagarah--the ocean.
TRANSLATIONOf priests, O Arjuna, know Me to be the chief, Brhaspati, the lord of
devotion. Of generals I am Skanda, the lord of war; and of bodies ofwater I am the ocean.
PURPORTIndra is the chief demigod of the heavenly planets and is known as the
king of the heavens. The planet in which he reigns is called Indraloka.Brhaspati is Indra's priest, and since Indra is the chief of all kings,Brhaspati is the chief of all priests. And as Indra is the chief of allkings, similarly Skanda the son of Parvati and Lord Siva, is the chiefof all military commanders. And of all bodies of water, the ocean isthe greatest. These representations of Krsna only give hints of Hisgreatness.
TEXT 25
maharsinam bhrgur aham
giram asmy ekam aksaramyajnanam japa-yajno 'smisthavaranam himalayah
SYNONYMSmaha-rsinam--among the great sages; bhrguh--Bhrgu; aham--I am; giram--
of vibrations; asmi--I am; ekam aksaram--pranava; yajnanam--ofsacrifices; japa-yajnah--chanting; asmi--I am; sthavaranam--ofimmovable things; himalayah--the Himalayan mountains.
TRANSLATIONOf the great sages I am Bhrgu; of vibrations I am the transcendental
om. Of sacrifices I am the chanting of the holy names [japa], and ofimmovable things I am the Himalayas.
PURPORTBrahma, the first living creature within the universe, created several
sons for the propagation of various kinds of species. The most powerfulof his sons is Bhrgu, who is also the greatest sage. Of all thetranscendental vibrations, the om (omkara) represents the Supreme. Ofall sacrifices, the chanting of Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna,
Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare is the purest
representation of Krsna. Sometimes animal sacrifices are recommended,but in the sacrifice of Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, there is no question ofviolence. It is the simplest and the purest. Whatever is sublime in theworlds is a representation of Krsna. Therefore the Himalayas, thegreatest mountains in the world, also represent Him. The mountain namedMeru was mentioned in a previous verse, but Meru is sometimes movable,whereas the Himalayas are never movable. Thus the Himalayas are greaterthan Meru.
TEXT 26
asvatthah sarva-vrksanam
devarsinam ca naradahgandharvanam citrarathahsiddhanam kapilo munih
SYNONYMSasvatthah--the banyan tree; sarva-vrksanam--of all trees; deva-rsinam--
of all the sages amongst the demigods; ca--and; naradah--Narada;gandharvanam--the citizens of the Gandharva planet; citrarathah--Citraratha; siddhanam--of all those who are perfected; kapilah munih--Kapila Muni.
TRANSLATIONOf all trees I am the holy fig tree, and among sages and demigods I am
Narada. Of singers of the gods [Gandharvas] I am Citraratha, and amongperfected beings I am the sage Kapila.
PURPORTThe fig tree (asvattha) is one of the most beautiful and highest trees,
and people in India often worship it as one of their daily morningrituals. Amongst the demigods they also worship Narada, who isconsidered the greatest devotee in the universe. Thus he is therepresentation of Krsna as a devotee. The Gandharva planet is filledwith entities who sing beautifully, and among them the best singer isCitraratha. Amongst the perpetually living entities, Kapila isconsidered an incarnation of Krsna, and His philosophy is mentioned inthe Srimad-Bhagavatam. Later on another Kapila became famous, but hisphilosophy was atheistic. Thus there is a gulf of difference betweenthem.
TEXT 27
uccaihsravasam asvanam
viddhi mam amrtodbhavamairavatam gajendranamnaranam ca naradhipam
SYNONYMSuccaihsravasam--Uccaihsrava; asvanam--among horses; viddhi--know; mam--
Me; amrta-udbhavam--produced from the churning of the ocean; airavatam--Airavata; gaja-indranam--of elephants; naranam--among human beings;ca--and; nara-adhipam--the king.
TRANSLATION
Of horses know Me to be Uccaihsrava, who rose out of the ocean, born of
the elixir of immortality; of lordly elephants I am Airavata, and amongmen I am the monarch.
PURPORTThe devotee demigods and the demons (asuras) once took a sea journey.
On this journey, nectar and poison were produced, and Lord Siva drankthe poison. From the nectar were produced many entities, of which therewas a horse named Uccaihsrava. Another animal produced from the nectarwas an elephant named Airavata. Because these two animals were producedfrom nectar, they have special significance, and they arerepresentatives of Krsna.Amongst the human beings the king is the representative of Krsnabecause Krsna is the maintainer of the universe, and the kings, who areappointed on account of their godly qualifications, are maintainers oftheir kingdoms. Kings like Maharaja Yudhisthira, Maharaja Pariksit andLord Rama were all highly righteous kings who always thought of thecitizens' welfare. In Vedic literature, the king is considered to bethe representative of God. In this age, however, with the corruption ofthe principles of religion, monarchy decayed and is now finallyabolished. It is to be understood that in the past, however, peoplewere more happy under righteous kings.
TEXT 28
ayudhanam aham vajram
dhenunam asmi kamadhukprajanas casmi kandarpahsarpanam asmi vasukih
SYNONYMSayudhanam--of all weapons; aham--I am; vajram--the thunderbolt;
dhenunam--of cows; asmi--I am; kama-dhuk--the surabhi cows; prajanah--for begetting children; ca--and; asmi--I am; kandarpah--Cupid;sarpanam--of all snakes; asmi--I am; vasukih--Vasuki.
TRANSLATIONOf weapons I am the thunderbolt; among cows I am the surabhi, givers of
abundant milk. Of procreators I am Kandarpa, the god of love, and ofserpents I am Vasuki, the chief.
PURPORTThe thunderbolt, indeed a mighty weapon, represents Krsna's power. In
Krsnaloka in the spiritual sky there are cows which can be milked atany time, and they give as much milk as one likes. Of course such cowsdo not exist in this material world, but there is mention of them inKrsnaloka. The Lord keeps many such cows, which are called surabhi. Itis stated that the Lord is engaged in herding the surabhi cows.Kandarpa is the sex desire for presenting good sons; therefore Kandarpais the representative of Krsna. Sometimes sex is engaged in only for
sense gratification; such sex does not represent Krsna. But sex for the
generation of good children is called Kandarpa and represents Krsna.
TEXT 29
anantas casmi naganam
varuno yadasam ahampitrnam aryama casmiyamah samyamatam aham
SYNONYMSanantah--Ananta; ca--also; asmi--I am; naganam--of all serpents;
varunah--the demigod controlling the water; yadasam--of all aquatics;aham--I am; pitrnam--of the ancestors; aryama--Aryama; ca--also; asmi--I am; yamah--the controller of death; samyamatam--of all regulators;aham--I am.
TRANSLATIONOf the celestial Naga snakes I am Ananta; of the aquatic deities I am
Varuna. Of departed ancestors I am Aryama, and among the dispensers oflaw I am Yama, lord of death.
PURPORTAmong the many celestial Naga serpents, Ananta is the greatest, as is
Varuna among the aquatics. They both represent Krsna. There is also aplanet of Pitas, ancestors, presided over by Aryama, who representsKrsna. There are many living entities who give punishment to themiscreants, and among them Yama is the chief. Yama is situated in aplanet near this earthly planet, and after death those who are verysinful are taken there, and Yama arranges different kinds ofpunishments for them.
TEXT 30
prahladas casmi daityanam
kalah kalayatam ahammrganam ca mrgendro 'hamvainateyas ca paksinam
SYNONYMSprahladah--Prahlada; ca--also; asmi--I am; daityanam--of the demons;
kalah--time; kalayatam--of subduers; aham--I am; mrganam--of animals;ca--and; mrga-indrah--the lion; aham--I am; vainateyah--Garuda; ca--also; paksinam--of birds.
TRANSLATIONAmong the Daitya demons I am the devoted Prahlada; among subduers I am
time; among beasts I am the lion, and among birds I am Garuda, thefeathered carrier of Visnu.
PURPORT
Diti and Aditi are two sisters. The sons of Aditi are called Adityas,
and the sons of Diti are called Daityas. All the Adityas are devoteesof the Lord, and all the Daityas are atheistic. Although Prahlada wasborn in the family of the Daityas, he was a great devotee from hischildhood. Because of his devotional service and godly nature, he isconsidered to be a representative of Krsna.There are many subduing principles, but time wears down all things inthe material universe and so represents Krsna. Of the many animals, thelion is the most powerful and ferocious, and of the million varietiesof birds, Garuda, the bearer of Lord Visnu, is the greatest.
TEXT 31
pavanah pavatam asmi
ramah sastra-bhrtam ahamjhasanam makaras casmisrotasam asmi jahnavi
SYNONYMSpavanah--the wind; pavatam--of all that purifies; asmi--I am; ramah--
Rama; sastra-bhrtam--of the carriers of weapons; aham--I am; jhasanam--of all aquatics; makarah--shark; ca asmi--I am also; srotasam--offlowing rivers; asmi--I am; jahnavi--the River Ganges.
TRANSLATIONOf purifiers I am the wind; of the wielders of weapons I am Rama; of
fishes I am the shark, and of flowing rivers I am the Ganges.
PURPORTOf all the aquatics the shark is one of the biggest and is certainly
the most dangerous to man. Thus the shark represents Krsna. And ofrivers, the greatest in India is the Mother Ganges. Lord Ramacandra, ofthe Ramayana, an incarnation of Krsna, is the mightest of warriors.
TEXT 32
sarganam adir antas ca
madhyam caivaham arjunaadhyatma-vidya vidyanamvadah pravadatam aham
SYNONYMSsarganam--of all creations; adih--beginning; antah--end; ca--and;
madhyam--middle; ca--also; eva--certainly; aham--I am; arjuna--OArjuna; adhyatma-vidya--spiritual knowledge; vidyanam--of alleducation; vadah--natural conclusion; pravadatam--of arguments; aham--Iam.
TRANSLATIONOf all creations I am the beginning and the end and also the middle, O
Arjuna. Of all sciences I am the spiritual science of the self, andamong logicians I am the conclusive truth.
PURPORT
Among created manifestations, the total material elements are first
created by Maha-Visnu and are annihilated by Lord Siva. Brahma is asecondary creator. All these created elements are differentincarnations of the material qualities of the Supreme Lord; thereforeHe is the beginning, the middle and the end of all creation.Regarding the spiritual science of the self, there are manyliteratures, such as the four Vedas, the Vedanta-sutra and the Puranas,the Srimad Bhagavatam and the Gita. These are all representatives ofKrsna. Among logicians there are different stages of argument. Thepresentation of evidence is called jalpa. The attempt to defeat oneanother is called vitanda, and the final conclusion is called vada. Theconclusive truth, the end of all reasoning processes, is Krsna.
TEXT 33
aksaranam akaro 'smi
dvandvah samasikasya caaham evaksayah kalodhataham visvato-mukhah
SYNONYMSaksaranam--of letters; akarah--the first; asmi--I am; dvandvah--dual;
samasikasya--compounds; ca--and; aham--I am; eva--certainly; aksayah--eternal; kalah--time; dhata--creator; aham--I am; visvatah-mukhah--Brahma.
TRANSLATIONOf letters I am the letter A, and among compound words I am the dual
compound. I am also inexhaustible time, and of creators I am Brahma,whose manifold faces turn everywhere.
PURPORTAkara, the first letter of the Sanskrit alphabet, is the beginning of
the Vedic literature. Without akara, nothing can be sounded; thereforeit is the beginning of sound. In Sanskrit there are also many compoundwords, of which the dual word, like Rama-krsna, is called dvandva. Forinstance, Rama and Krsna have the same rhythm, and therefore are calleddual.Among all kinds of killers, time is the ultimate because time killseverything. Time is the representative of Krsna because in due courseof time there will be a great fire and everything will be annihilated.Among the creators and living entities, Brahma is the chief. Thevarious Brahma's exhibit four, eight, sixteen, etc., heads accordingly,and they are the chief creators in their respective universes. TheBrahmas are representatives of Krsna.
TEXT 34
mrtyuh sarva-haras caham
udbhavas ca bhavisyatamkirtih srir vak ca narinamsmrtir medha dhrtih ksama
SYNONYMS
mrtyuh--death; sarva-harah--all-devouring; ca--also; aham--I am;
udbhavah--generation; ca--also; bhavisyatam--of the future; kirtih--fame; srih vak--beautiful speech; ca--also; narinam--of women; smrtih--memory; medha--intelligence; dhrtih--faithfulness; ksama--patience.
TRANSLATIONI am all-devouring death, and I am the generator of all things yet to
be. Among women I am fame, fortune, speech, memory, intelligence,faithfulness and patience.
PURPORTAs soon as a man is born, he dies at every moment. Thus death is
devouring every living entity at every moment, but the last stroke iscalled death itself. That death is Krsna. All species of life undergosix basic changes. They are born, they grow, they remain for some time,they reproduce, they dwindle and finally they vanish. Of these changes,the first is deliverance from the womb, and that is Krsna. The firstgeneration is the beginning of all future activities.The seven opulences listed are considered to be feminine. If a womanpossesses all of them or some of them she becomes glorious. Sanskrit isa perfect language and is therefore very glorious. After studying, ifone can remember the subject matter, he is gifted with a good memory,or smrti. One need not read many books on different subject matters;the ability to remember a few and quote them when necessary is anotheropulence.
TEXT 35
brhat-sama tatha samnam
gayatri chandasam ahammasanam marga-sirso 'hamrtunam kusumakarah
SYNONYMSbrhat-sama--the Brhat-sama; tatha--also; samnam--of the Sama Veda
songs; gayatri--the Gayatri hymns; chandasam--of all poetry; aham--Iam; masanam--of months; marga-sirsah--the month of November-December;aham--I am; rtunam--of all seasons; kusuma-akarah--spring.
TRANSLATIONOf hymns I am the Brhat-sama sung to the Lord Indra, and of poetry I am
the Gayatri verse, sung daily by Brahmanas. Of months I am November andDecember, and of seasons I am flower-bearing spring.
PURPORTIt has already been explained by the Lord that amongst all the Vedas,
the Sama Veda is rich with beautiful songs played by the variousdemigods. One of these songs is the Brhat-sama, which has an exquisitemelody and is sung at midnight.In Sanskrit there are definite rules that regulate poetry; rhyme andmeter are not written whimsically, as in much modern poetry. Amongst
the regulated poetry, the Gayatri mantra, which is chanted by the duly
qualified brahmanas, is the most prominent. The Gayatri mantra ismentioned in the Srimad-Bhagavatam. Because the Gayatri mantra isespecially meant for God realization, it represents the Supreme Lord.This mantra is meant for spiritually advanced people, and when oneattains success in chanting it, he can enter into the transcendentalposition of the Lord. One must first acquire the qualities of theperfectly situated person, the qualities of goodness according to thelaws of material nature, in order to chant the Gayatri mantra. TheGayatri mantra is very important in Vedic civilization and isconsidered to be the sound incarnation of Brahman. Brahma is itsinitiator, and it is passed down from him in disciplic succession.The months of November and December are considered the best of allmonths because in India grains are collected from the fields at thistime, and the people become very happy. Of course spring is a seasonuniversally liked because it is neither too hot nor too cold, and theflowers and trees blossom and flourish. In spring there are also manyceremonies commemorating Krsna's pastimes; therefore this is consideredto be the most joyful of all seasons, and it is the representative ofthe Supreme Lord, Krsna.
TEXT 36
dyutam chalayatam asmi
tejas tejasvinam ahamjayo 'smi vyavasayo 'smisattvam sattvavatam aham
SYNONYMSdyutam--gambling; chalayatam--of all cheats; asmi--I am; tejah--
splendid; tejasvinam--of everything splendid; aham--I am; jayah--victory; asmi--I am; vyavasayah--adventure; asmi--I am; sattvam--strength; sattva-vatam--of all the strong; aham--I am.
TRANSLATIONI am also the gambling of cheats, and of the splendid I am the
splendor. I am victory, I am adventure, and I am the strength of thestrong.
PURPORTThere are many kinds of cheaters all over the universe. Of all cheating
processes, gambling stands supreme and therefore represents Krsna. Asthe Supreme, Krsna can be more deceitful than any mere man. If Krsnachooses to deceive a person, no one can surpass Him in His deceit. Hisgreatness is not simply one-sided--it is all-sided.Among the victorious, He is victory. He is the splendor of thesplendid. Among enterprising industrialists, He is the mostenterprising, the most industrious. Among adventurers, He is the mostadventurous, and among the strong He is the strongest. When Krsna waspresent on earth, no one could surpass Him in strength. Even in Hischildhood He lifted Govardhana Hill. No one can surpass Him incheating, no one can surpass Him in splendor, no one can surpass Him invictory, no one can surpass Him in enterprise, and no one can surpassHim in strength.
TEXT 37
vrsninam vasudevo 'smi
pandavanam dhananjayahmuninam apy aham vyasahkavinam usana kavih
SYNONYMSvrsninam--of the descendants of Vrsni; vasudevah--Krsna in Dvaraka;
asmi--I am; pandavanam--of the Pandavas; dhananjayah--Arjuna; muninam--of the sages; api--also; aham--I am; vyasah--Vyasa, the compiler of allVedic literature; kavinam--of all great thinkers; usana--Usana; kavih--the thinker.
TRANSLATIONOf the descendants of Vrsni I am Vasudeva, and of the Pandavas I am
Arjuna. Of the sages I am Vyasa, and among great thinkers I am Usana.
PURPORTKrsna is the original Supreme Personality of Godhead, and Vasudeva is
the immediate expansion of Krsna. Both Lord Krsna and Baladeva appearas the sons of Vasudeva. Amongst the sons of Pandu, Arjuna is famousand valiant. Indeed, He is the best of men and therefore representsKrsna. Among the munis, or learned men conversant in Vedic knowledge,Vyasa is the greatest because he explained Vedic knowledge in manydifferent ways for the understanding of the common mass of people inthis Age of Kali. And Vyasa is also known as an incarnation of Krsna;therefore Vyasa also represents Krsna. Kavis are those who are capableof thinking thoroughly on any subject matter. Among the kavis, Usanawas the spiritual master of the demons; he was an extremelyintelligent, far-seeing, political and spiritual in every way. ThusUsana is another representative of the opulence of Krsna.
TEXT 38
dando damayatam asmi
nitir asmi jigisatammaunam caivasmi guhyanamjnanam jnanavatam aham
SYNONYMSdandah--punishment; damayatam--of all separation; asmi--I am; nitih--
morality; asmi--I am; jigisatam--of the victorious; maunam--silence;ca--and; eva--also; asmi--I am; guhyanam--of secrets; jnanam--knowledge; jnana-vatam--of the wise; aham--I am.
TRANSLATIONAmong punishments I am the rod of chastisement, and of those who seek
victory I am morality. Of secret things I am silence, and of the wise Iam wisdom.
PURPORT
There are many suppressing agents, of which the most important are
those that cut down the miscreants. When miscreants are punished, therod of chastisement represents Krsna. Among those who are trying to bevictorious in some field of activity, the most victorious element ismorality. Among the confidential activities of hearing, thinking andmeditating, silence is most important because by silence one can makeprogress very quickly. The wise man is he who can discriminate betweenmatter and spirit, between God's superior and inferior natures. Suchknowledge is Krsna Himself.
TEXT 39
yac capi sarva-bhutanam
bijam tad aham arjunana tad asti vina yat syanmaya bhutam caracaram
SYNONYMSyat--whatever; ca--also; api--may be; sarva-bhutanam--of all creations;
bijam--the seed; tat--that; aham--I am; arjuna--O Arjuna; na--not; tat--that; asti--there is; vina--without; yat--that; syat--exists; maya--byMe; bhutam--created; cara-acaram--moving and unmoving.
TRANSLATIONFurthermore, O Arjuna, I am the generating seed of all existences.
There is no being--moving or unmoving--that can exist without Me.
PURPORTEverything has a cause, and that cause or seed of manifestation is
Krsna. Without Krsna's energy, nothing can exist; therefore He iscalled omnipotent. Without His potency, neither the movable nor theunmovable can exist. Whatever existence is not founded on the energy ofKrsna is called maya, that which is not.
TEXT 40
nanto 'sti mama divyanam
vibhutinam parantapaesa tuddesatah proktovibhuter vistaro maya
SYNONYMSna--nor; antah--a limit; asti--is there; mama--My; divyanam--divine;
vibhutinam--opulences; parantapa--O conqueror of the enemies; esah--allthis; tu--that; uddesatah--examples; proktah--spoken; vibhuteh--opulences; vistarah--expanded; maya--by Me.
TRANSLATIONO mighty conqueror of enemies, there is no end to My divine
manifestations. What I have spoken to you is but a mere indication ofMy infinite opulences.
PURPORT
As stated in the Vedic literature, although the opulences and energies
of the Supreme are understood in various ways, there is no limit tosuch opulences; therefore not all the opulences and energies can beexplained. Simply a few examples are being described to Arjuna topacify his inquisitiveness.
TEXT 41
yad yad vibhutimat sattvam
srimad urjitam eva vatat tad evavagaccha tvammama tejo-'msa-sambhavam
SYNONYMSyat yat--whatever; vibhuti--opulences; mat--having; sattvam--existence;
sri-mat--beautiful; urjitam--glorious; eva--certainly; va--or; tat tat--all those; eva--certainly; avagaccha--you must know; tvam--you; mama--My; tejah--splendor; amsa--partly; sambhavam--born of.
TRANSLATIONKnow that all beautiful, glorious, and mighty creations spring from but
a spark of My splendor.
PURPORTAny glorious or beautiful existence should be understood to be but a
fragmental manifestation of Krsna's opulence, whether it be in thespiritual or material world. Anything extraordinarily opulent should beconsidered to represent Krsna's opulence.
TEXT 42
atha va bahunaitena
kim jnatena tavarjunavistabhyaham idam krtsnamekamsena sthito jagat
SYNONYMSatha va--or; bahuna--many; etena--by this kind; kim--what; jnatena--
knowing; tava--you; arjuna--O Arjuna; vistabhya--entire; aham--I; idam--this; krtsnam--of all manifestations; eka--one; amsena--part; sthitah--situated; jagat--in the universe.
TRANSLATIONBut what need is there, Arjuna, for all this detailed knowledge? With a
single fragment of Myself I pervade and support this entire universe.
PURPORTThe Supreme Lord is represented throughout the entire material
universes by His entering into all things as the Supersoul. The Lordhere tells Arjuna that there is no point in understanding how thingsexist in their separate opulence and grandeur. He should know that all
things are existing due to Krsna's entering them as Supersoul. From
Brahma, the most gigantic entity, on down to the smallest ant, all areexisting because the Lord has entered each and all and is sustainingthem.Worship of demigods is discouraged herein because even the greatestdemigods like Brahma and Siva only represent part of the opulence ofthe Supreme Lord. He is the origin of everyone born, and no one isgreater than Him. He is asamaurdhva, which means that no one issuperior to Him and that no one is equal to Him. In the Padma Purana itis said that one who considers the Supreme Lord Krsna in the samecategory with demigods--be they even Brahma or Siva--becomes at once anatheist. If, however, one thoroughly studies the different descriptionsof the opulences and expansions of Krsna's energy, then one canunderstand without any doubt the position of Lord Sri Krsna and can fixhis mind in the worship of Krsna without deviation. The Lord is all-pervading by the expansion of His partial representation, theSupersoul, who enters into everything that is. Pure devotees,therefore, concentrate their minds in Krsna consciousness in fulldevotional service; therefore they are always situated in thetranscendental position. Devotional service and worship of Krsna arevery clearly indicated in this chapter in verses eight through eleven.That is the way of pure devotional service. How one can attain thehighest devotional perfection of association with the SupremePersonality of Godhead has been thoroughly explained in this chapter.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Tenth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of the Opulence of the Absolute.
Chapter 11
The Universal Form
TEXT 1
arjuna uvaca
mad-anugrahaya paramamguhyam adhyatma-samjnitamyat tvayoktam vacas tenamoho 'yam vigato mama
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; mat-anugrahaya--just show me favor;
paramam--supreme; guhyam--confidential; adhyatma--spiritual; samjnitam--in the matter of; yat--what; tvaya--by You; uktam--said; vacah--words;tena--by that; mohah--illusion; ayam--this; vigatah--is educated; mama--my.
TRANSLATIONArjuna said: I have heard Your instruction on confidential spiritual
matters which You have so kindly delivered unto me, and my illusion isnow dispelled.
PURPORTThis chapter reveals Krsna as the cause of all causes. He is even the
cause of the Maha-Visnu, and from Him the material universes emanate.
Krsna is not an incarnation; He is the source of all incarnations. That
has been completely explained in the last chapter.Now, as far as Arjuna is concerned, he says that his illusion is over.This means that Arjuna no longer thinks of Krsna as a mere human being,as a friend of his, but as the source of everything. Arjuna is veryenlightened and is glad that he has a great friend like Krsna, but nowhe is thinking that although he may accept Krsna as the source ofeverything, others may not. So in order to establish Krsna's divinityfor all, he is requesting Krsna in this chapter to show His universalform. Actually when one sees the universal form of Krsna one becomesfrightened, like Arjuna, but Krsna is so kind that after showing it Heconverts Himself again into His original form. Arjuna agrees to whatKrsna has said several times. Krsna is speaking to him just for hisbenefit, and Arjuna acknowledges that all this is happening to him byKrsna's grace. He is now convinced that Krsna is the cause of allcauses and is present in everyone's heart as the Supersoul.
TEXT 2
bhavapyayau hi bhutanam
srutau vistaraso mayatvattah kamala-patraksamahatmyam api cavyayam
SYNONYMSbhava--appearance; apyayau--disappearance; hi--certainly; bhutanam--of
all living entities; srutau--have heard; vistarasah--detail; maya--byme; tvattah--from You; kamala-patra-aksa--O lotus-eyed one; mahatmyam--glories; api--also; ca--and; avyayam--inexhaustible.
TRANSLATIONO lotus-eyed one, I have heard from You in detail about the appearance
and disappearance of every living entity, as realized through Yourinexhaustible glories.
PURPORTArjuna addresses Lord Krsna as "lotus-eyed" (Krsna's eyes appear just
like the petals of a lotus flower) out of his joy, for Krsna hasassured him, in the last verse of the previous chapter, that Hesustains the entire universe with just a fragment of Himself. He is thesource of everything in this material manifestation, and Arjuna hasheard of this from the Lord in detail. Arjuna further knows that inspite of His being the source of all appearances and disappearances, Heis aloof from them. His personality is not lost, although He is all-pervading. That is the inconceivable opulence of Krsna which Arjunaadmits that he has thoroughly understood.
TEXT 3
evam etad yathattha tvam
atmanam paramesvaradrastum icchami te rupamaisvaram purusottama
SYNONYMS
evam--that; etat--this; yatha--as it is; attha--have spoken; tvam--You;
atmanam--the soul; parama-isvara--the Supreme Lord; drastum--to see;icchami--I wish; te--You; rupam--form; aisvaram--divine; purusa-uttama--O best of personalities.
TRANSLATIONO greatest of all personalities, O supreme form, though I see here
before me Your actual position, I wish to see how You have entered intothis cosmic manifestation. I want to see that form of Yours.
PURPORTThe Lord said that because He entered into the material universe by His
personal representation, the cosmic manifestation has been madepossible and is going on. Now as far as Arjuna is concerned, he isinspired by the statements of Krsna, but in order to convince others inthe future who may think that Krsna is an ordinary person, he desiresto see Him actually in His universal form, to see how He is acting fromwithin the universe, although He is apart from it. Arjuna's asking theLord's permission is also significant. Since the Lord is the SupremePersonality of Godhead, He is present within Arjuna himself; thereforeHe knows the desire of Arjuna, and He can understand that Arjuna has nospecial desire to see Him in His universal form, for he is completelysatisfied to see Him in His personal form of Krsna. But He canunderstand also that Arjuna wants to see the universal form to convinceothers. He did not have any personal desire for confirmation. Krsnaalso understands that Arjuna wants to see the universal form to set acriterion, for in the future there would be so many imposters who wouldpose themselves as incarnations of God. The people, therefore, shouldbe careful; one who claims to be Krsna should be prepared to show hisuniversal form to confirm his claim to the people.
TEXT 4
manyase yadi tac chakyam
maya drastum iti prabhoyogesvara tato me tvamdarsayatmanam avyayam
SYNONYMSmanyase--if You think; yadi--if; tat--that; sakyam--able to see; maya--
by me; drastum--to see; iti--thus; prabho--O Lord; yoga-isvara--O Lordof all mystic power; tatah--then; me--unto me; tvam--You; darsaya--show; atmanam--Yourself; avyayam--eternal.
TRANSLATIONIf You think that I am able to behold Your cosmic form, O my Lord, O
master of all mystic power, then kindly show me that universal Self.
PURPORTIt is said that one can neither see, hear, understand nor perceive the
Supreme Lord, Krsna, by the material senses. But if one is engaged inloving transcendental service to the Lord from the beginning, then one
can see the Lord by revelation. Every living entity is only a spiritual
spark; therefore it is not possible to see or to understand the SupremeLord. Arjuna, as a devotee, does not depend on his speculativestrength; rather, he admits his limitations as a living entity andacknowledges Krsna's inestimable position. Arjuna could understand thatfor a living entity it is not possible to understand the unlimitedinfinite. If the infinite reveals Himself, then it is possible tounderstand the nature of the infinite by the grace of the infinite. Theword yogesvara is also very significant here because the Lord hasinconceivable power. If He likes, He can reveal Himself by His grace,although He is unlimited. Therefore Arjuna pleads for the inconceivablegrace of Krsna. He does not give Krsna orders. Krsna is not obliged toreveal Himself to anyone unless one surrenders fully in Krsnaconsciousness and engages in devotional service. Thus it is notpossible for persons who depend on the strength of their mentalspeculations to see Krsna.
TEXT 5
sri-bhagavan uvaca
pasya me partha rupanisataso 'tha sahasrasahnana-vidhani divyaninana-varnakrtini ca
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; pasya--
just see; me--Mine; partha--O son of Prtha; rupani--forms; satasah--hundreds; atha--also; sahasrasah--thousands; nana-vidhani--variegated;divyani--divine; nana--variegated; varna--colors; akrtini--forms; ca--also.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: My dear Arjuna, O son of Prtha, behold now My
opulences, hundreds of thousands of varied divine forms, multicoloredlike the sea.
PURPORTArjuna wanted to see Krsna in His universal form, which, although a
transcendental form, is just manifested for the cosmic manifestationand is therefore subject to the temporary time of this material nature.As the material nature is manifested and not manifested, similarly thisuniversal form of Krsna is manifested and nonmanifested. It is noteternally situated in the spiritual sky like Krsna's other forms. Asfar as a devotee is concerned, he is not eager to see the universalform, but because Arjuna wanted to see Krsna in this way, Krsna revealsthis form. This universal form is not possible to be seen by anyordinary man. Krsna must give one the power to see it.
TEXT 6
pasyadityan vasun rudran
asvinau marutas tathabahuny adrsta-purvanipasyascaryani bharata
SYNONYMS
pasya--see; adityan--the twelve sons of Aditi; vasun--the eight Vasus;
rudran--the eleven forms of Rudra; asvinau--the two Asvinis; marutah--the forty-nine Maruts (demigods of the wind); tatha--also; bahuni--many; adrsta--that you have not head or seen; purvani--before; pasya--there see; ascaryani--all the wonderful; bharata--O best of theBharatas.
TRANSLATIONO best of the Bharatas, see here the different manifestations of
Adityas, Rudras, and all the demigods. Behold the many things which noone has ever seen or heard before.
PURPORTEven though Arjuna was a personal friend of Krsna and the most advanced
of learned men, it was still not possible for him to know everythingabout Krsna. Here it is stated that humans have neither heard nor knownof all these forms and manifestations. Now Krsna reveals thesewonderful forms.
TEXT 7
ihaika-stham jagat krtsnam
pasyadya sa-caracarammama dehe gudakesayac canyad drastum icchasi
SYNONYMSiha--in this; eka-stham--in one; jagat--the universe; krtsnam--
completely; pasya--see; adya--immediately; sa--with; cara--moving;acaram--not moving; mama--My; dehe--in this body; gudakesa--O Arjuna;yat--that; ca--also; anyat--other; drastum--to see; icchasi--you like.
TRANSLATIONWhatever you wish to see can be seen all at once in this body. This
universal form can show you all that you now desire, as well aswhatever you may desire in the future. Everything is here completely.
PURPORTNo one can see the entire universe sitting in one place. Even the most
advanced scientist cannot see what is going on in other parts of theuniverse. But a devotee like Arjuna can see everything that exists inany part of the universe. Krsna gives him the power to see anything hewants to see, past, present and future. Thus by the mercy of Krsna,Arjuna is able to see everything.
TEXT 8
na tu mam sakyase drastum
anenaiva sva-caksusadivyam dadami te caksuh
pasya me yogam aisvaram
SYNONYMSna--never; tu--but; mam--Me; sakyase--able; drastum--to see; anena--by
this; eva--certainly; sva-caksusa--with your own eyes; divyam--divine;dadami--I give; te--you; caksuh--eyes; pasya--see; me--My; yogamaisvaram--inconceivable mystic power.
TRANSLATIONBut you cannot see Me with your present eyes. Therefore I give you
divine eyes by which you can behold My mystic opulence!
PURPORTA pure devotee does not like to see Krsna in any form except His form
with two hands; a devotee must see His universal form by His grace, notwith the mind but with spiritual eyes. To see the universal form ofKrsna, Arjuna is told not to change his mind but his vision. Theuniversal form of Krsna is not very important; that will be clear inthe verses. Yet because Arjuna wanted to see it, the Lord gives him theparticular vision required to see that universal form.Devotees who are correctly situated in a transcendental relationshipwith Krsna are attracted by loving features, not by a godless displayof opulences. The playmates of Krsna, the friends of Krsna and theparents of Krsna never want Krsna to show His opulences. They are soimmersed in pure love that they do not even know that Krsna is theSupreme Personality of Godhead. In their loving exchange they forgetthat Krsna is the Supreme Lord. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is statedthat the boys who play with Krsna are all highly pious souls, and aftermany, many births they are able to play with Krsna. Such boys do notknow that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They take Him asa personal friend. The Supreme Person is considered the impersonalBrahman by great sages, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead by thedevotees, and as a product of this material nature by ordinary men. Thefact is that the devotee is not concerned to see the visva-rupa, theuniversal form, but Arjuna wanted to see it to substantiate Krsna'sstatement so that in the future people could understand that Krsna notonly theoretically or philosophically presented Himself as the Supremebut actually presented Himself as such to Arjuna. Arjuna must confirmthis because Arjuna is the beginning of the parampara system. Those whoare actually interested to understanding the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, Krsna, and who follow in the footsteps of Arjuna shouldunderstand that Krsna not only theoretically presented Himself as theSupreme, but actually revealed Himself as the Supreme.The Lord gave Arjuna the necessary power to see His universal formbecause He knew that Arjuna did not particularly want to see it, as wehave already explained.
TEXT 9
sanjaya uvaca
evam uktva tato rajanmaha-yogesvaro harihdarsayam asa parthayaparamam rupam aisvaram
SYNONYMS
sanjayah uvaca--Sanjaya said; evam--thus; uktva--saying; tatah--
thereafter; rajan--O King; maha-yoga-isvarah--the most powerful mystic;harih--the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna; darsayam asa--showed;parthaya--unto Arjuna; paramam--divine; rupam--universal form;aisvaram--opulences.
TRANSLATIONSanjaya said: O King, speaking thus, the Supreme, the Lord of all
mystic power, the Personality of Godhead, displayed His universal formto Arjuna.
TEXTS 10-11
aneka-vaktra-nayanam
anekadbhuta-darsanamaneka-divyabharanamdivyanekodyatayudham
divya-malyambara-dharam
divya-gandhanulepanamsarvascarya-mayam devamanantam visvato-mukham
SYNONYMSaneka--various; vaktra--mouths; nayanam--eyes; aneka--various; adbhuta-
-wonderful; darsanam--sights; aneka--many; divya--divine; abharanam--ornaments; divya--divine; aneka--various; udyata--uplifted; ayudham--weapons; divya--divine; malya--garlands; ambara dharam--covered withthe dresses; divya--divine; gandha--fragrance; anulepanam--smeared;sarva--all; ascarya-mayam--wonderful; devam--shining; anantam--unlimited; visvatah-mukham--all-pervading.
TRANSLATIONArjuna saw in that universal form unlimited mouths and unlimited eyes.
It was all wondrous. The form was decorated with divine, dazzlingornaments and arrayed in many garbs. He was garlanded gloriously, andthere were many scents smeared over His body. All was magnificent, all-expanding, unlimited. This was seen by Arjuna.
PURPORTThese two verses indicate that there is no limit to the hands, mouths,
legs, etc., of the Lord. These manifestations are distributedthroughout the universe and are unlimited. By the grace of the Lord,Arjuna could see them while sitting in one place. That is due to theinconceivable potency of Krsna.
TEXT 12
divi surya-sahasrasya
bhaved yugapad utthitayadi bhah sadrsi sa syadbhasas tasya mahatmanah
SYNONYMS
divi--in the sky; surya--sun; sahasrasya--of many thousands; bhavet--
there were; yugapat--simultaneously; utthita--present; yadi--if; bhah--light; sadrsi--like that; sa--that; syat--may be; bhasah--effulgence;tasya--there is; maha-atmanah--of the great Lord.
TRANSLATIONIf hundreds of thousands of suns rose up at once into the sky, they
might resemble the effulgence of the Supreme Person in that universalform.
PURPORTWhat Arjuna saw was indescribable, yet Sanjaya is trying to give a
mental picture of that great revelation to Dhrtarastra. Neither Sanjayanor Dhrtarastra was present, but Sanjaya, by the grace of Vyasa, couldsee whatever happened. Thus he now compares the situation, as far as itcan be understood, to an imaginable phenomenon (i.e. thousands ofsuns).
TEXT 13
tatraika-stham jagat krtsnam
pravibhaktam anekadhaapasyad deva-devasyasarire pandavas tada
SYNONYMStatra--there; eka-stham--one place; jagat--universe; krtsnam--
completely; pravibhaktam--divided in; anekadha--many kinds; apasyat--could see; deva-devasya--of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarire--in the universal form; pandavah--Arjuna; tada--at that time.
TRANSLATIONAt that time Arjuna could see in the universal form of the Lord the
unlimited expansions of the universe situated in one place althoughdivided into many, many thousands.
PURPORTThe word tatra (there) is very significant. It indicates that both
Arjuna and Krsna were sitting on the chariot when Arjuna saw theuniversal form. Others on the battlefield could not see this formbecause Krsna gave the vision only to Arjuna. Arjuna could see in thebody of Krsna many thousands of universes. As we learn from Vedicscriptures, there are many universes and many planets. Some of them aremade of earth, some are made of gold, some are made of jewels, some arevery great, some are not so great, etc. Sitting on his chariot, Arjunacould see all these universes. But no one could understand what wasgoing on between Arjuna and Krsna.
TEXT 14
tatah sa vismayavisto
hrsta-roma dhananjayahpranamya sirasa devamkrtanjalir abhasata
SYNONYMStatah--thereafter; sah--he; vismaya-avistah--being overwhelmed with
wonder; hrsta-roma--with his bodily hairs standing on end due to hisgreat ecstasy; dhananjayah--Arjuna; pranamya--offering obeisances;sirasa--with the head; devam--to the Supreme Personality of Godhead;krta-anjalih--with folded hands; abhasata--began to say.
TRANSLATIONThen, bewildered and astonished, his hair standing on end, Arjuna began
to pray with folded hands, offering obeisances to the Supreme Lord.
PURPORTOnce the divine vision is revealed, the relationship between Krsna and
Arjuna changes immediately. Before, Krsna and Arjuna had a relationshipbased on friendship, but here, after the revelation, Arjuna is offeringobeisances with great respect, and with folded hands he is praying toKrsna. He is praising the universal form. Thus Arjuna's relationshipbecomes one of wonder rather than friendship. Great devotees see Krsnaas the reservoir of all relationships. In the scriptures there aretwelve basic kinds of relationships mentioned, and all of them arepresent in Krsna. It is said that He is the ocean of all therelationships exchanged between two living entities, between the gods,or between the Supreme Lord and His devotees.It is said that Arjuna was inspired by the relationship of wonder, andin that wonder, although he was by nature very sober, calm and quiet,he became ecstatic, his hair stood up, and he began to offer hisobeisances unto the Supreme Lord with folded hands. He was not, ofcourse, afraid. He was affected by the wonders of the Supreme Lord. Theimmediate context is wonder; his natural loving friendship wasoverwhelmed by wonder, and thus he reacted in this way.
TEXT 15
arjuna uvaca
pasyami devams tava deva dehesarvams tatha bhuta-visesa-sanghanbrahmanam isam kamalasana-sthamrsims ca sarvan uragams ca divyan
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; pasyami--I see; devan--all the demigods;
tava--Your; deva--O Lord; dehe--in the body; sarvan--all; tatha--also;bhuta--living entities; visesa-sanghan--specifically assembled;brahmanam--Lord Brahma; isam--Lord Siva; kamala-asana-stham--sitting onthe lotus flower; rsin--great sages; ca--also; sarvan--all; uragan--serpents; ca--also; divyan--divine.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: My dear Lord Krsna, I see assembled together in Your body
all the demigods and various other living entities. I see Brahmasitting on the lotus flower as well as Lord Siva and many sages anddivine serpents.
PURPORTArjuna sees everything in the universe; therefore he sees Brahma, who
is the first creature in the universe, and the celestial serpent uponwhich the Garbhodakasayi Visnu lies in the lower regions of theuniverse. This snake bed is called Vasuki. There are also other snakesknown as Vasuki. Arjuna can see from the Garbhodakasayi Visnu up to thetopmost part of the universe on the lotus-flower planet where Brahma,the first creature of the universe, resides. That means that from thebeginning to the end, everything could be seen by Arjuna sitting in oneplace on his chariot. This was possible by the grace of the SupremeLord, Krsna.
TEXT 16
aneka-bahudara-vaktra-netram
pasyami tvam sarvato 'nanta-rupamnantam na madhyam na punas tavadimpasyami visvesvara visva-rupa
SYNONYMSaneka--many; bahu--arms; udara--bellies; vaktra--mouths; netram--eyes;
pasyami--I see; tvam--unto You; sarvatah--from all sides; ananta-rupam--unlimited form; na antam--there is no end; na madhyam--there is nomiddle; na punah--nor again; tava--Your; adim--beginning; pasyami--Isee; visva-isvara--O Lord of the universe; visva-rupa--in the form ofthe universe.
TRANSLATIONO Lord of the universe, I see in Your universal body many, many forms--
bellies, mouths, eyes--expanded without limit. There is no end, thereis no beginning, and there is no middle to all this.
PURPORTKrsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead and is unlimited; thus
through Him everything could be seen.
TEXT 17
kiritinam gadinam cakrinam ca
tejo-rasim sarvato diptimantampasyami tvam durniriksyam samantaddiptanalarka-dyutim aprameyam
SYNONYMSkiritinam--with helmets; gadinam--with maces; cakrinam--with discs; ca-
-and; tejah-rasim--effulgence; sarvatah--all sides; dipti-mantam--glowing; pasyami--I see; tvam--You; durniriksyam--difficult to see;
samantat--spreading; dipta-anala--blazing fire; arka--sun; dyutim--
sunshine; aprameyam--immeasurable.
TRANSLATIONYour form, adorned with various crowns, clubs and discs, is difficult
to see because of its glaring effulgence, which is fiery andimmeasurable like the sun.
TEXT 18
tvam aksaram paramam veditavyam
tvam asya visvasya param nidhanamtvam avyayah sasvata-dharma-goptasanatanas tvam puruso mato me
SYNONYMStvam--You; aksaram--inexhaustible; paramam--supreme; veditavyam--to be
understood; tvam--You; asya--of this; visvasya--of the universe; param--supreme; nidhanam--basis; tvam--You are; avyayah--inexhaustible;sasvata-dharma-gopta--maintainer of the eternal religion; sanatanah--eternal; tvam--You; purusah--Supreme Personality; matah me--is myopinion.
TRANSLATIONYou are the supreme primal objective; You are the best in all the
universes; You are inexhaustible, and You are the oldest; You are themaintainer of religion, the eternal Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 19
anadi-madhyantam ananta-viryam
ananta-bahum sasi-surya-netrampasyami tvam dipta-hutasa-vaktramsva-tejasa visvam idam tapantam
SYNONYMSanadi--without beginning; madhya--without middle; antam--without end;
ananta--unlimited; viryam--glorious; ananta--unlimited; bahum--arms;sasi--moon; surya--sun; netram--eyes; pasyami--I see; tvam--You; dipta--blazing; hutasa-vaktram--fire coming out of Your mouth; sva-tejasa--byYour; visvam--this universe; idam--this; tapantam--heating.
TRANSLATIONYou are the origin without beginning, middle or end. You have
numberless arms, and the sun and moon are among Your great unlimitedeyes. By Your own radiance You are heating this entire universe.
PURPORTThere is no limit to the extent of the six opulences of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Here and in many other places there isrepetition, but according to the scriptures, repetition of the gloriesof Krsna is not a literary weakness. It is said that at a time of
bewilderment or wonder or of great ecstasy, statements are repeated
over and over. That is not a flaw.
TEXT 20
dyav a-prthivyor idam antaram hi
vyaptam tvayaikena disas ca sarvahdrstvadbhutam rupam ugram tavedamloka-trayam pravyathitam mahatman
SYNONYMSdyau--in outer space; a-prthivyoh--of the earth; idam--this; antaram--
in between; hi--certainly; vyaptam--pervaded; tvaya--by You; ekena--byone; disah--directions; ca--and; sarvah--all; drstva--by seeing;adbhutam--wonderful; rupam--form; ugram--terrible; tava--Your; idam--this; loka--planetary system; trayam--three; pravyathitam--perturbed;maha-atman--O great one.
TRANSLATIONAlthough You are one, You are spread throughout the sky and the planets
and all space between. O great one, as I behold this terrible form, Isee that all the planetary systems are perplexed.
PURPORTDyav a-prthivyoh (the space between heaven and earth) and loka-trayam
(the three worlds) are significant words in this verse because itappears that not only Arjuna saw this universal form of the Lord, butothers in other planetary systems also saw it. The vision was not adream. All whom were spiritually awake with the divine vision saw it.
TEXT 21
ami hi tvam sura-sangha visanti
kecid bhitah pranjalayo grnantisvastity uktva maharsi-siddha-sanghahstuvanti tvam stutibhih puskalabhih
SYNONYMSami--all those; hi--certainly; tvam--unto You; sura-sanghah--groups of
demigods; visanti--entering; kecit--some of them; bhitah--out of fear;pranjalayah--with folded hands; grnanti--offering prayers unto; svasti--all peace; iti--thus; uktva--speaking like that; maha-rsi--greatsages; siddha-sanghah--perfect sages; stuvanti--singing hymns; tvam--unto You; stutibhih--with prayers; puskalabhih--Vedic hymns.
TRANSLATIONAll the demigods are surrendering and entering into You. They are very
much afraid, and with folded hands they are singing the Vedic hymns.
PURPORT
The demigods in all the planetary systems feared the terrific
manifestation of the universal form and its glowing effulgence and soprayed for protection.
TEXT 22
rudraditya vasavo ye ca sadhya
visve 'svinau marutas cosmapas cagandharva-yaksasura-siddha-sanghaviksante tvam vismitas caiva sarve
SYNONYMSrudra--manifestations of Lord Siva; adityah--the Adityas; vasavah--the
Vasus; ye--all those; ca--and; sadhyah--the Sadhyas; visve--theVisvedevas; asvinau--the Asvini-kumaras; marutah--the Maruts; ca--and;usma-pah--the forefathers; ca--and; gandharva--of the Gandharvas;yaksa--the Yaksas; asura-siddha--the demons and the perfected demigods;sanghah--assemblies; viksante--are seeing; tvam--You; vismitah--inwonder; ca--also; eva--certainly; sarve--all.
TRANSLATIONThe different manifestations of Lord Siva, the Adityas, the Vasus, the
Sadhyas, the Visvedevas, the two Asvis, the Maruts, the forefathers andthe Gandharvas, the Yaksas, Asuras, and all perfected demigods arebeholding You in wonder.
TEXT 23
rupam mahat te bahu-vaktra-netram
maha-baho bahu-bahuru-padambahudaram bahu-damstra-karalamdrstva lokah pravyathitas tathaham
SYNONYMSrupam--form; mahat--very great; te--of You; bahu--many; vaktra--faces;
netram--eyes; maha-baho--O mighty-armed one; bahu--many; bahu--arms;uru--thighs; padam--legs; bahu-udaram--many bellies; bahu-damstra--manyteeth; karalam--horrible; drstva--seeing; lokah--all the planets;pravyathitah--perturbed; tatha--similarly; aham--I.
TRANSLATIONO mighty-armed one, all the planets with their demigods are disturbed
at seeing Your many faces, eyes, arms, bellies and legs and Yourterrible teeth, and as they are disturbed, so am I.
TEXT 24
nabhah-sprsam diptam aneka-varnam
vyattananam dipta-visala-netramdrstva hi tvam pravyathitantar-atmadhrtim na vindami samam ca visno
SYNONYMS
nabhah-sprsam--touching the sky; diptam--glowing; aneka--many; varnam--
color; vyatta--open; ananam--mouth; dipta--glowing; visala--very great;netram--eyes; drstva--by seeing; hi--certainly; tvam--You; pravyathita--perturbed; antah--within; atma--soul; dhrtim--steadiness; na--no;vindami--and have; samam--mental tranquillity; ca--also; visno--O LordVisnu.
TRANSLATIONO all-pervading Visnu, I can no longer maintain my equilibrium. Seeing
Your radiant colors fill the skies and beholding Your eyes and mouths,I am afraid.
TEXT 25
damstra-karalani ca te mukhani
drstvaiva kalanala-sannibhanidiso na jane na labhe ca sarmaprasida devesa jagan-nivasa
SYNONYMSdamstra--teeth; karalani--like that; ca--also; te--Your; mukhani--
faces; drstva--seeing; eva--thus; kala-anala--the fire of death;sannibhani--as if blazing; disah--directions; na jane--do not know; nalabhe--nor obtain; ca sarma--and grace; prasida--be pleased; deva-isa--O Lord of all lords; jagat-nivasa--refuge of the worlds.
TRANSLATIONO Lord of lords, O refuge of the worlds, please be gracious to me. I
cannot keep my balance seeing thus Your blazing deathlike faces andawful teeth. In all directions I am bewildered.
TEXTS 26-27
ami ca tvam dhrtarastrasya putrah
sarve sahaivavani-pala-sanghaihbhismo dronah suta-putras tathasausahasmadiyair api yodha-mukhyaih
vaktrani te tvaramana visanti
damstra-karalani bhayanakanikecid vilagna dasanantaresusandrsyante curnitair uttamangaih
SYNONYMSami--all those; ca--also; tvam--You; dhrtarastrasya--of Dhrtarastra;
putrah--sons; sarve--all; saha eva--along with; avani-pala--warriorkings; sanghaih--the groups; bhismah--Bhismadeva; dronah--Dronacarya;suta-putrah--Karna; tatha--also; asau--that; saha--with; asmadiyaih--our; api--also; yodha-mukhyaih--chief among the warriors; vaktrani--mouths; te--Your; tvaramanah--fearful; visanti--entering; damstra--teeth; karalani--terrible; bhayanakani--very fearful; kecit--some ofthem; vilagnah--being attacked; dasana-antaresu--between the teeth;sandrsyante--being seen; curnitaih--smashed; uttama-angaih--by thehead.
TRANSLATION
All the sons of Dhrtarastra along with their allied kings, and Bhisma,
Drona and Karna, and all our soldiers are rushing into Your mouths,their heads smashed by Your fearful teeth. I see that some are beingcrushed between Your teeth as well.
PURPORTIn a previous verse the Lord promised to show Arjuna things he would be
very interested in seeing. Now Arjuna sees that the leaders of theopposite party (Bhisma, Drona, Karna and all the sons of Dhrtarastra)and their soldiers and Arjuna's own soldiers are all being annihilated.This is an indication that Arjuna will emerge victorious in battle,despite heavy losses on both sides. It is also mentioned here thatBhisma, who is supposed to be unconquerable, will also be smashed. Soalso Karna. Not only will the great warriors of the other party likeBhisma be smashed, but some of the great warriors of Arjuna's sidealso.
TEXT 28
yatha nadinam bahavo 'mbu-vegah
samudram evabhimukha dravantitatha tavami nara-loka-viravisanti vaktrany abhivijvalanti
SYNONYMSyatha--as; nadinam--of the rivers; bahavah--many; ambu-vegah--waves of
the waters; samudram--ocean; eva--certainly; abhimukhah--towards;dravanti--gliding; tatha--similarly; tava--Your; ami--all those; nara-loka-virah--the kings of human society; visanti--entering; vaktrani--into the mouths; abhivijvalanti--blazing.
TRANSLATIONAs the rivers flow into the sea, so all these great warriors enter Your
blazing mouths and perish.
TEXT 29
yatha pradiptam jvalanam patanga
visanti nasaya samrddha-vegahtathaiva nasaya visanti lokastavapi vaktrani samrddha-vegah
SYNONYMSyatha--as; pradiptam--blazing; jvalanam--fire; patangah--moths;
visanti--enters; nasaya--destruction; samrddha--full; vegah--speed;tatha eva--similarly; nasaya--for destruction; visanti--entering;lokah--all people; tava--unto You; api--also; vaktrani--in the mouths;samrddha-vegah--with full speed.
TRANSLATION
I see all people rushing with full speed into Your mouths as moths dash
into a blazing fire.
TEXT 30
lelihyase grasamanah samantal
lokan samagran vadanair jvaladbhihtejobhir apurya jagat samagrambhasas tavograh pratapanti visno
SYNONYMSlelihyase--licking; grasamanah--devouring; samantat--from all
directions; lokan--people; samagran--completely; vadanaih--by themouth; jvaladbhih--with blazing; tejobhih--by effulgence; apurya--covering; jagat--the universe; samagram--all; bhasah--illuminating;tava--Your; ugrah--terrible; pratapanti--scorching; visno--O all-pervading Lord.
TRANSLATIONO Visnu, I see You devouring all people in Your flaming mouths and
covering the universe with Your immeasurable rays. Scorching theworlds, You are manifest.
TEXT 31
akhyahi me ko bhavan ugra-rupo
namo 'stu te deva-vara prasidavijnatum icchami bhavantam adyamna hi prajanami tava pravrttim
SYNONYMSakhyahi--please explain; me--unto me; kah--who; bhavan--You; ugra-
rupah--fierce form; namah astu--obeisances; te--unto You; deva-vara--the great one amongst the demigods; prasida--be gracious; vijnatum--just to know; icchami--I wish; bhavantam--You; adyam--the original; na--never; hi--certainly; prajanami--do I know; tava--Your; pravrttim--mission.
TRANSLATIONO Lord of lords, so fierce of form, please tell me who You are. I offer
my obeisances unto You; please be gracious to me. I do not know whatYour mission is, and I desire to hear of it.
TEXT 32
sri-bhagavan uvaca
kalo 'smi loka-ksaya-krt pravrddholokan samahartum iha pravrttahrte 'pi tvam na bhavisyanti sarveye 'vasthitah pratyanikesu yodhah
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Personality of Godhead said; kalah--time; asmi-
-I am; loka--the worlds; ksaya-krt--destroyer; pravrddhah--to engage;lokan--all people; samahartum--to destroy; iha--in this world;pravrttah--to engage; rte api--without even; tvam--you; na--never;bhavisyanti--will be; sarve--all; ye--who; avasthitah--situated; prati-anikesu--on the opposite side; yodhah--the soldiers.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: Time I am, destroyer of the worlds, and I have
come to engage all people. With the exception of you [the Pandavas],all the soldiers here on both sides will be slain.
PURPORTAlthough Arjuna knew that Krsna was his friend and the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, he was nonetheless puzzled by the various formsexhibited by Krsna. Therefore he asked further about the actual missionof this devastating force. It is written in the Vedas that the SupremeTruth destroys everything, even Brahma. As stated in the Katha Upanisad(1.2.25),
yasya brahma ca ksatram ca
ubhe bhavata odanahmrtyur yasyopasecanamka ittha veda yatra sah
Eventually all the brahmanas, ksatriyas and everyone else are devoured
by the Supreme. This form of the Supreme Lord is the all-devouringgiant, and here Krsna presents Himself in that form of all-devouringtime. Except for a few Pandavas, everyone who was present in thatbattlefield would be devoured by Him.TEXT 33
tasmat tvam uttistha yaso labhasva
jitva satrun bhunksva rajyam samrddhammayaivaite nihatah purvam evanimitta-matram bhava savya-sacin
SYNONYMStasmat--therefore; tvam--you; uttistha--get up; yasah--fame; labhasva--
gain; jitva--conquering; satrun--enemies; bhunksva--enjoy; rajyam--kingdom; samrddham--flourishing; maya--by Me; eva--certainly; ete--allthese; nihatah--already killed; purvam eva--by previous arrangement;nimitta-matram--just the cause; bhava--become; savya-sacin--OSavyasaci.
TRANSLATIONTherefore get up and prepare to fight. After conquering your enemies
you will enjoy a flourishing kingdom. They are already put to death byMy arrangement, and you, O Savyasaci, can be but an instrument in thefight.
PURPORT
Savya-sacin refers to one who can shoot arrows very expertly in the
field; thus Arjuna is addressed as an expert warrior capable ofdelivering arrows to kill his enemies. "Just become an instrument":nimitta-matram. This word is also very significant. The whole world ismoving according to the plan of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.Foolish persons who do not have sufficient knowledge think that natureis moving without a plan and all manifestations are but accidentalformations. There are many so-called scientists who suggest thatperhaps it was like this, or maybe like that, but there is no questionof "perhaps" and "maybe." There is a specific plan being carried out inthis material world. What is this plan? This cosmic manifestation is achance for the conditioned souls to go back to Godhead, back to home.As long as they have the domineering mentality which makes them try tolord it over material nature, they are conditioned. But anyone who canunderstand the plan of the Supreme Lord and cultivate Krsnaconsciousness is most intelligent. The creation and destruction of thecosmic manifestation are under the superior guidance of God. Thus theBattle of Kuruksetra was fought according to the plan of God. Arjunawas refusing to fight, but he was told that he should fight and at thesame time desire the Supreme Lord. Then he would be happy. If one is infull Krsna consciousness and if his life is devoted to Histranscendental service, he is perfect.
TEXT 34
dronam ca bhismam ca jayadratham ca
karnam tathanyan api yodha-viranmaya hatams tvam jahi ma vyathisthayudhyasva jetasi rane sapatnan
SYNONYMSdronam ca--also Drona; bhismam ca--also Bhisma; jayadratham ca--also
Jayadratha; karnam--also Karna; tatha--also; anyan--others; api--certainly; yodha-viran--great warriors; maya--by Me; hatan--alreadykilled; tvam--you; jahi--become victorious; ma--never; vyathisthah--bedisturbed; yudhyasva--just fight; jeta asi--just conquer; rane--in thefight; sapatnan--enemies.
TRANSLATIONTHe Blessed Lord said: All the great warriors--Drona, Bhisma,
Jayadratha, Karna--are already destroyed. Simply fight, and you willvanquish your enemies.
PURPORTEvery plan is made by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but He is so
kind and merciful to His devotees that He wants to give the credit toHis devotees who carry out His plan according to His desire. Lifeshould therefore move in such a way that everyone acts in Krsnaconsciousness and understands the Supreme Personality of Godheadthrough the medium of a spiritual master. The plans of the SupremePersonality of Godhead are understood by His mercy, and the plans ofthe devotees are as good as His plans. One should follow such plans andbe victorious in the struggle for existence.
TEXT 35
sanjaya uvaca
etac chrutva vacanam kesavasyakrtanjalir vepamanah kiritinamaskrtva bhuya evaha krsnamsa-gadgadam bhita-bhitah pranamya
SYNONYMSsanjayah uvaca--Sanjaya said; etat--thus; srutva--hearing; vacanam--
speech; kesavasya--of Krsna; krta-anjalih--with folded hands;vepamanah--trembling; kiriti--Arjuna; namaskrtva--offering obeisances;bhuyah--again; eva--also; aha krsnam--said unto Krsna; sa-gadgadam--faltering; bhita-bhitah--fearful; pranamya--offering obeisances.
TRANSLATIONSanjaya said to Dhrtarastra: O King, after hearing these words from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Arjuna trembled, fearfully offeredobeisances with folded hands and began, falteringly, to speak asfollows:
PURPORTAs we have already explained, because of the situation created by the
universal form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Arjuna becamebewildered in wonder; thus he began to offer his respectful obeisancesto Krsna again and again, and with faltering voice he began to pray,not as a friend, but as a devotee in wonder.
TEXT 36
arjuna uvaca
sthane hrsikesa tava prakirtyajagat prahrsyaty anurajyate caraksamsi bhitani diso dravantisarve namasyanti ca siddha-sanghah
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; sthane--rightly; hrsika-isa--O master of
all senses; tava--Your; prakirtya--glories; jagat--the entire world;prahrsyati--rejoicing; anurajyate--becoming attached; ca--and;raksamsi--the demons; bhitani--out of fear; disah--directions;dravanti--fleeing; sarve--all; namasyanti--offering respect; ca--also;siddha-sanghah--the perfect human beings.
TRANSLATIONO Hrsikesa, the world becomes joyful upon hearing Your name, and thus
everyone becomes attached to You. Although the perfected beings offerYou their respectful homage, the demons are afraid, and they flee hereand there. All this is rightly done.
PURPORTArjuna, after hearing from Krsna about the outcome of the Battle of
Kuruksetra, became an enlightened devotee of the Supreme Lord. He
admitted that everything done by Krsna is quite fit. Arjuna confirmed
that Krsna is the maintainer and the object of worship for the devoteesand the destroyer of the undesirables. His actions are equally good forall. Arjuna understood herein that when the Battle of Kuruksetra wasbeing concluded, in outer space there were present many demigods,siddhas, and the intelligentsia of the higher planets, and they wereobserving the fight because Krsna was present there. When Arjuna sawthe universal form of the Lord, the demigods took pleasure in it, butothers, who were demons and atheists, could not stand it when the Lordwas praised. Out of their natural fear of the devastating form of theSupreme Personality of Godhead, they fled. Krsna's treatment of thedevotees and the atheists is praised by Arjuna. In all cases a devoteeglorifies the Lord because he knows that whatever He does is good forall.
TEXT 37
kasmac ca te na nameran mahatman
gariyase brahmano 'py adi-kartreananta devesa jagan-nivasatvam aksaram sad-asat tat param yat
SYNONYMSkasmat--why; ca--also; te--unto You; na--not; nameran--offer proper
obeisances; maha-atman--O great one; gariyase--You are better than;brahmanah--Brahma; api--although; adi-kartre--the supreme creator;ananta--unlimited; deva-isa--God of the gods; jagat-nivasa--O refuge ofthe universe; tvam--You are; aksaram--imperishable; sat-asat--cause andeffect; tat param--transcendental; yat--because.
TRANSLATIONO great one, who stands above even Brahma, You are the original master.
Why should they not offer their homage up to You, O limitless one? Orefuge of the universe, You are the invincible source, the cause of allcauses, transcendental to this material manifestation.
PURPORTBy this offering of obeisances, Arjuna indicates that Krsna is
worshipable by everyone. He is all-pervading, and He is the Soul ofevery soul. Arjuna is addressing Krsna as mahatma, which means that Heis most magnanimous and unlimited. Ananta indicates that there isnothing which is not covered by the influence and energy of the SupremeLord, and devesa means that He is the controller of all demigods and isabove them all. He is the center of the whole universe. Arjuna alsothought that it was fitting that all the perfect living entities andall powerful demigods offer their respectful obeisances unto Himbecause no one is greater than Him. He especially mentions that Krsnais greater than Brahma because Brahma is created by Him. Brahma is bornout of the lotus stem grown from the navel abdomen of GarbhodakasayiVisnu, who is Krsna's plenary expansion; therefore Brahma and LordSiva, who is born of Brahma, and all other demigods must offer theirrespectful obeisances. Thus the Lord is respected by Lord Siva andBrahma and similar other demigods. The word aksaram is very significantbecause this material creation is subject to destruction but the Lordis above this material creation. He is the cause of all causes, and
being so, He is superior to all the conditioned souls within this
material nature as well as the material cosmic manifestation itself. Heis therefore the all-great Supreme.
TEXT 38
tvam adi-devah purusah puranas
tvam asya visvasya param nidhanamvettasi vedyam ca param ca dhamatvaya tatam visvam ananta-rupa
SYNONYMStvam--You; adi-devah--the original Supreme God; purusah--personality;
puranah--old; tvam--You; asya--this; visvasya--universe; param--transcendental; nidhanam--refuge; vetta--knower; asi--You are; vedyamca--and the knowable; param ca--and transcendental; dhama--refuge;tvaya--by You; tatam--pervaded; visvam--universe; ananta-rupa--unlimited form.
TRANSLATIONYou are the original Personality, the Godhead. You are the only
sanctuary of this manifested cosmic world. You know everything, and Youare all that is knowable. You are above the material modes O limitlessform! This whole cosmic manifestation is pervaded by You!
PURPORTEverything is resting on the Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore
He is the ultimate rest. Nidhanam means that everything, even theBrahman effulgence, rests on the Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsna.He is the knower of everything that is happening in this world, and ifknowledge has any end, He is the end of all knowledge; therefore He isthe known and the knowable. He is the object of knowledge because He isall-pervading. Because He is the cause in the spiritual world, He istranscendental. He is also the chief personality in the transcendentalworld.
TEXT 39
vayur yamo 'gnir varunah sasankah
prajapatis tvam prapitamahas canamo namas te 'stu sahasra-krtvahpunas ca bhuyo 'pi namo namas te
SYNONYMSvayuh--air; yamah--controller; agnih--fire; varunah--water; sasa-ankah-
-moon; prajapatih--Brahma; tvam--You; prapitamahah--grandfather; ca--also; namah--offering respects; namah te--again my respects unto You;astu--are being; sahasra-krtvah--a thousand times; punah ca--and again;bhuyah--again; api--also; namah--offer my respects; namah te--offeringmy respects unto You.
TRANSLATION
You are air, fire, water and You are the moon! You are the supreme
controller and the grandfather. Thus I offer my respectful obeisancesunto You a thousand times, and again and yet again!
PURPORTThe Lord is addressed here as air because the air is the most important
representation of all the demigods, being all-pervasive. Arjuna alsoaddresses Krsna as the grandfather because He is the father of Brahma,the first living creature in the universe.
TEXT 40
namah purastad atha prsthatas te
namo 'stu te sarvata eva sarvaananta-viryamita-vikramas tvamsarvam samapnosi tato 'si sarvah
SYNONYMSnamah--offering obeisances; purastat--from the front; atha--also;
prsthatah--from behind; te--You; namah astu--offer my respects; te--unto You; sarvatah--from all sides; eva sarva--because You areeverything; ananta-virya--unlimited potency; amita-vikramah--unlimitedforce; tvam--You; sarvam--everything; samapnosi--cover; tatah asi--therefore You are; sarvah--everything.
TRANSLATIONObeisances from the front, from behind and from all sides! O unbounded
power, You are the master of limitless might! You are all-pervading,and thus You are everything!
PURPORTOut of loving ecstasy for Krsna, his friend, Arjuna is offering his
respects from all sides. He is accepting that He is the master of allpotencies and all prowess and far superior to all the great warriorsassembled on the battlefield. It is said in the Visnu Purana (1.9.69):
yo 'yam tavagato deva
samipam devata-ganahsa tvam eva jagat-srastayatah sarva-gato bhavan
"Whoever comes before You, be he a demigod, is created by You, O
Supreme Personality of Godhead."
TEXTS 41-42
sakheti matva prasabham yad uktam
he krsna he yadava he sakhetiajanata mahimanam tavedammaya pramadat pranayena vapi
yac cavahasartham asat-krto 'si
vihara-sayyasana-bhojanesueko 'tha vapy acyuta tat-samaksam
tat ksamaye tvam aham aprameyam
SYNONYMSsakha--friend; iti--thus; matva--thinking; prasabham--temporary; yat--
whatever; uktam--said; he krsna--O Krsna; he yadava--O Yadava; he sakheiti--O my dear friend; ajanata--without knowing; mahimanam--glories;tava--Your; idam--this; maya--by me; pramadat--out of foolishness;pranayena--out of love; va api--either; yat--whatever; ca--also;avahasa-artham--for joking; asat-krtah--dishonor; asi--have been done;vihara--in relaxation; sayya--in joking; asana--in a resting place;bhojanesu--or while eating together; ekah--alone; atha va--or; api--others; acyuta--O infallible one; tat-samaksam--as Your competitor;tat--all those; ksamaye--excuse; tvam--from You; aham--I; aprameyam--immeasurable.
TRANSLATIONI have in the past addressed You as "O Krsna," "O Yadava," "O my
friend," without knowing Your glories. Please forgive whatever I mayhave done in madness or in love. I have dishonored You many times whilerelaxing or while lying on the same bed or eating together, sometimesalone and sometimes in front of many friends. Please excuse me for allmy offenses.
PURPORTAlthough Krsna is manifested before Arjuna in His universal form,
Arjuna remembers his friendly relationship with Krsna and is thereforeasking pardon and requesting Him to excuse him for the many informalgestures which arise out of friendship. He is admitting that formerlyhe did not know that Krsna could assume such a universal form, althoughKrsna explained it as his intimate friend. Arjuna did not know how manytimes he may have dishonored Krsna by addressing Him "O my friend," "OKrsna," "O Yadava," etc., without acknowledging His opulence. But Krsnais so kind and merciful that in spite of such opulence He played withArjuna as a friend. Such is the transcendental loving reciprocationbetween the devotee and the Lord. The relationship between the livingentity and Krsna is fixed eternally; it cannot be forgotten, as we cansee from the behavior of Arjuna. Although Arjuna has seen the opulencein the universal form, he cannot forget his friendly relationship withKrsna.
TEXT 43
pitasi lokasya caracarasya
tvam asya pujyas ca gurur gariyanna tvat-samo 'sty abhyadhikah kuto 'nyoloka-traye 'py apratima-prabhava
SYNONYMSpita--father; asi--You are; lokasya--of all the world; cara--moving;
acarasya--nonmoving; tvam--You are; asya--of this; pujyah--worshipable;ca--also; guruh--master; gariyan--glorious; na--never; tvat-samah--equal to You; asti--there is; abhyadhikah--greater; kutah--how is itpossible; anyah--other; loka-traye--in three planetary systems; api--also; apratima--immeasurable; prabhava--power.
TRANSLATION
You are the father of this complete cosmic manifestation, the
worshipable chief, the spiritual master. No one is equal to You, norcan anyone be one with You. Within the three worlds, You areimmeasurable.
PURPORTThe Lord Krsna is worshipable as a father is worshipable for his son.
He is the spiritual master because He originally gave the Vedicinstructions to Brahma, and presently He is also instructing Bhagavad-gita to Arjuna; therefore He is the original spiritual master, and anybona fide spiritual master at the present moment must be a descendantin the line of disciplic succession stemming from Krsna. Without beinga representative of Krsna, one cannot become a teacher or spiritualmaster of transcendental subject matter.The Lord is being paid obeisances in all respects. He is ofimmeasurable greatness. No one can be greater than the SupremePersonality of Godhead, Krsna, because no one is equal to or higherthan Krsna within any manifestation, spiritual or material. Everyone isbelow Him. No one can excel Him.The Supreme Lord, Krsna, has senses and a body like the ordinary man,but for Him there is no difference between His senses, body, mind andHimself. Foolish persons who do not know Him perfectly say that Krsnais different from His soul, mind, heart and everything else. Krsna isabsolute; therefore His activities and potencies are supreme. It isalso stated that He does not have senses like ours. He can perform allsensual activities; therefore His senses are neither imperfect norlimited. No one can be greater than Him, no one can be equal to Him,and everyone is lower than Him.Whoever knows His transcendental body, activities and perfection, afterquitting his body, returns to Him and doesn't come back again to thismiserable world. Therefore one should know that Krsna's activities aredifferent from others. The best policy is to follow the principles ofKrsna; that will make one perfect. It is also stated that there is noone who is master of Krsna; everyone is His servant. The Caitanya-caritamrta (Adi 5.142) confirms, ekale isvara krsna, ara saba bhrtya:only Krsna is God, and everyone else is His servant. Everyone iscomplying with His order. There is no one who can deny His order.Everyone is acting according to His direction, being under Hissuperintendence. As stated in the Brahma-samhita, He is the cause ofall causes.
TEXT 44
tasmat pranamya pranidhaya kayam
prasadaye tvam aham isam idyampiteva putrasya sakheva sakhyuhpriyah priyayarhasi deva sodhum
SYNONYMStasmat--therefore; pranamya--after offering obeisances; pranidhaya--
laying down; kayam--body; prasadaye--to beg mercy; tvam--unto You;aham--I; isam--unto the Supreme Lord; idyam--who is worshipable; pitaiva--like a father; putrasya--of a son; sakha iva--like a friend;
sakhyuh--of a friend; priyah--lover; priyayah--of the dearmost; arhasi-
-You should; deva--my Lord; sodhum--tolerate.
TRANSLATIONYou are the Supreme Lord, to be worshiped by every living being. Thus I
fall down to offer You my respects and ask Your mercy. Please toleratethe wrongs that I may have done to You and bear with me as a fatherwith his son, or a friend with his friend, or a lover with his beloved.
PURPORTKrsna's devotees relate to Krsna in various relationships; one might
treat Krsna as a son, one might treat Krsna as a husband, as a friend,as a master, etc. Krsna and Arjuna are related in friendship. As thefather tolerates, or the husband or master tolerates, so Krsnatolerates.
TEXT 45
adrsta-purvam hrsito 'smi drstva
bhayena ca pravyathitam mano metad eva me darsaya deva rupamprasida devesa jagan-nivasa
SYNONYMSadrsta-purvam--never seen before; hrsitah--gladdened; asmi--I am;
drstva--by seeing; bhayena--out of fear; ca--also; pravyathitam--perturbed; manah--mind; me--my; tat--therefore; eva--certainly; me--unto me; darsaya--show; deva--O Lord; rupam--the form; prasida--just begracious; deva-isa--O Lord of lords; jagat-nivasa--the refuge of theuniverse.
TRANSLATIONAfter seeing this universal form, which I have never seen before, I am
gladdened, but at the same time my mind is disturbed with fear.Therefore please bestow Your grace upon me and reveal again Your formas the Personality of Godhead, O Lord of lords, O abode of theuniverse.
PURPORTArjuna is always in confidence with Krsna because he is a very dear
friend, and as a dear friend is gladdened by his friend's opulence,Arjuna is very joyful to see that his friend, Krsna, is the SupremePersonality of Godhead and can show such a wonderful universal form.But at the same time, after seeing that universal form, he is afraidthat he has committed so many offenses to Krsna out of his unalloyedfriendship. Thus his mind is disturbed out of fear, although he had noreason to fear. Arjuna therefore is asking Krsna to show His Narayanaform because He can assume any form. This universal form is materialand temporary, as the material world is temporary. But in the Vaikunthaplanets He has His transcendental form with four hands as Narayana.There are innumerable planets in the spiritual sky, and in each of themKrsna is present by His plenary manifestations of different names. ThusArjuna desired to see one of the forms manifest in the Vaikuntha
planets. Of course in each Vaikuntha planet the form of Narayana is
four-handed, and the four hands hold different arrangements of symbols--the conchshell, mace, lotus and disc. According to the different handsthese four things are held in, the Narayanas are named. All of theseforms are one and the same to Krsna; therefore Arjuna requests to seeHis four-handed feature.
TEXT 46
kiritinam gadinam cakra-hastam
icchami tvam drastum aham tathaivatenaiva rupena catur-bhujenasahasra-baho bhava visva-murte
SYNONYMSkiritinam--with helmet; gadinam--with club; cakra-hastam--disc in hand;
icchami--I wish; tvam--You; drastum--to see; aham--I; tatha eva--inthat position; tena eva--by that; rupena--with form; catuh-bhujena--four-handed; sahasra-baho--O thousand-handed one; bhava--just become;visva-murte--O universal form.
TRANSLATIONO universal Lord, I wish to see You in Your four-armed form, with
helmeted head and with club, wheel, conch and lotus flower in Yourhands. I long to see You in that form.
PURPORTIn the Brahma-samhita (5.39) it is stated, ramadi-murtisu kala-niyamena
tisthan: the Lord is eternally situated in hundreds and thousands offorms, and the main forms are those like Rama, Nrsimha, Narayana, etc.There are innumerable forms. But Arjuna knew that Krsna is the originalPersonality of Godhead assuming His temporary universal form. He is nowasking to see the form of Narayana, a spiritual form. This verseestablishes without any doubt the statement of the Srimad-Bhagavatamthat Krsna is the original Personality of Godhead and all otherfeatures originate from Him. He is not different from His plenaryexpansions, and He is God in any of His innumerable forms. In all ofthese forms He is fresh like a young man. That is the constant featureof the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One who knows Krsna at oncebecomes free from all contamination of the material world.
TEXT 47
sri-bhagavan uvaca
maya prasannena tavarjunedamrupam param darsitam atma-yogattejo-mayam visvam anantam adyamyan me tvad anyena na drsta-purvam
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; maya--by
Me; prasannena--happily; tava--unto you; arjuna--O Arjuna; idam--this;rupam--form; param--transcendental; darsitam--shown; atma-yogat--by Myinternal potency; tejah-mayam--full of effulgence; visvam--the entire
universe; anantam--unlimited; adyam--original; yat me--that which is
Mine; tvat anyena--besides you; na drsta-purvam--no one has previouslyseen.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: My dear Arjuna, happily do I show you this
universal form within the material world by My internal potency. No onebefore you has ever seen this unlimited and glaringly effulgent form.
PURPORTArjuna wanted to see the universal form of the Supreme Lord, so out of
His mercy upon His devotee Arjuna, Lord Krsna showed him His universalform full of effulgence and opulence. This form was glaring like thesun, and its many faces were rapidly changing. Krsna showed this formjust to satisfy the desire of His friend Arjuna. This form wasmanifested by Krsna through His internal potency, which isinconceivable by human speculation. No one had seen this universal formof the Lord before Arjuna, but because the form was shown to Arjuna,other devotees in the heavenly planets and in other planets in outerspace could also see it. They did not seen it before, but because ofArjuna they were able to see it. In other words, all the disciplicdevotees of the Lord could see the universal form which was shown toArjuna by the mercy of Krsna. Someone commented that this form wasshown to Duryodhana also when Krsna went to Duryodhana to negotiate forpeace. Unfortunately, Duryodhana did not accept the peace offer, but atthat time Krsna manifested some of His universal forms. But those formsare different from this one shown to Arjuna. It is clearly said that noone has ever seen this form before.
TEXT 48
na veda-yajnadhyayanair na danair
na ca kriyabhir na tapobhir ugraihevam-rupah sakya aham nr-lokedrastum tvad anyena kuru-pravira
SYNONYMSna--never; veda--Vedic study; yajna--sacrifice; adhyayanaih--study; na
danaih--by charity; na--never; ca--also; kriyabhih--by piousactivities; na tapobhih--by serious penances; ugraih--severe; evam--thus; rupah--form; sakyah--can be seen; aham--I; nr-loke--in thismaterial world; drastum--to see; tvat--you; anyena--by another; kuru-pravira--O best among the Kuru warriors.
TRANSLATIONO best of the Kuru warriors, no one before you has ever seen this
universal form of Mine, for neither by studying the Vedas, nor byperforming sacrifices, nor by charities or similar activities can thisform be seen. Only you have seen this.
PURPORTThe divine vision in this connection should be clearly understood. Who
can have divine vision? Divine means godly. Unless one attains the
status of divinity as a demigod, he cannot have divine vision. And what
is a demigod? It is stated in the Vedic scriptures that those who aredevotees of Lord Visnu are demigods (visnu-bhaktah smrta devah). Thosewho are atheistic, i.e., who do not believe in Visnu, or who onlyrecognize the impersonal part of Krsna as the Supreme, cannot have thedivine vision. It is not possible to decry Krsna and at the same timehave the divine vision. One cannot have the divine vision withoutbecoming divine. In other words, those who have divine vision can alsosee like Arjuna.The Bhagavad-gita gives the description of the universal form, and thisdescription was unknown to everyone before Arjuna. Now one can havesome idea of the visva-rupa after this incident; those who are actuallydivine can see the universal form of the Lord. But one cannot be divinewithout being a pure devotee of Krsna. The devotees, however, who areactually in the divine nature and who have divine vision, are not verymuch interested to see the universal form of the Lord. As described inthe previous verse, Arjuna desired to see the four-handed form of LordKrsna as Visnu, and he was actually afraid of the universal form.In this verse there are some significant words, like veda-yajnadhyayanaih, which refers to studying Vedic literature and thesubject matter of sacrificial regulations. Veda refers to all kinds ofVedic literature, namely the four Vedas (Rg, Yajur, Sama and Atharva)and the eighteen Puranas, the Upanisads and the Vedanta-sutra. One canstudy these at home or anywhere else. Similarly, there are sutras--Kalpa-sutras and Mimamsa-sutras--for studying the method of sacrifice.Danaih refers to charity which is offered to a suitable party, such asthose who are engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord--the brahmanas and the Vaisnavas. Similarly, "pious activities" refersto the agni-hotra and the prescribed duties of the different castes.And the voluntary acceptance of some bodily pains is called tapasya. Soone can perform all these, can accept bodily penances, give charity,study the Vedas, etc., but unless he is a devotee like Arjuna, it isnot possible to see that universal form. Those who are impersonalistsare also imagining that they are seeing the universal form of the Lord,but from Bhagavad-gita we understand that the impersonalists are notdevotees. Therefore they are unable to see the universal form of theLord.There are many persons who create incarnations. They falsely claim anordinary human being to be an incarnation, but all this is foolishness.We should follow the principles of Bhagavad-gita, otherwise there is nopossibility of attaining perfect spiritual knowledge. AlthoughBhagavad-gita is considered the preliminary study of the science ofGod, still it is so perfect that one can distinguish what is what. Thefollowers of a pseudo incarnation may say that they have also seen thetranscendental incarnation of God, the universal form, but that is notacceptable because it is clearly stated here that unless one becomes adevotee of Krsna, one cannot see the universal form of God. So onefirst of all has to become a pure devotee of Krsna; then he can claimthat he can show the universal form of what he has seen. A devotee ofKrsna cannot accept false incarnations or followers of falseincarnations.
TEXT 49
ma te vyatha ma ca vimudha-bhavo
drstva rupam ghoram idrn mamedamvyapeta-bhih prita-manah punas tvamtad eva me rupam idam prapasya
SYNONYMS
ma--let it not be; te--unto you; vyatha--trouble; ma--let it not be;
ca--also; vimudha-bhavah--bewilderment; drstva--by seeing; rupam--form;ghoram--horrible; idrk--like this; mama--My; idam--as it is; vyapeta-bhih--just become free from all fear; prita-manah--be pleased in mind;punah--again; tvam--you; tat--that; eva--thus; me--My; rupam--form;idam--this; prapasya--just see.
TRANSLATIONYour mind has been perturbed upon seeing this horrible feature of Mine.
Now let it be finished. My devotee, be free from all disturbance. Witha peaceful mind you can now see the form you desire.
PURPORTIn the beginning of Bhagavad-gita Arjuna was worried about killing
Bhisma and Drona, his worshipful grandfather and master. But Krsna saidthat he need not be afraid of killing his grandfather. When they triedto disrobe Draupadi in the assembly, Bhisma and Drona were silent, andfor such negligence of duty they should be killed. Krsna showed Hisuniversal form to Arjuna just to show him that these people werealready killed for their unlawful action. That scene was shown toArjuna because devotees are always peaceful, and they cannot performsuch horrible actions. The purpose of the revelation of the universalform was shown; now Arjuna wanted to see the four-armed form, and Krsnashowed him. A devotee is not much interested in the universal form, forit does not enable one to reciprocate loving feelings. A devotee wantsto offer his respectful worshiping feelings; thus he wants to see thetwo-handed or four-handed Krsna form so he can reciprocate in lovingservice with the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 50
sanjaya uvaca
ity arjunam vasudevas tathoktvasvakam rupam darsayam asa bhuyahasvasayam asa ca bhitam enambhutva punah saumya-vapur mahatma
SYNONYMSsanjayah uvaca--Sanjaya said; iti--thus; arjunam--unto Arjuna;
vasudevah--Krsna; tatha--that way; uktva--saying; svakam--His own;rupam--form; darsayam asa--showed; bhuyah--again; asvasayam asa--alsoconvinced him; ca--also; bhitam--fearful; enam--him; bhutva punah--becoming again; saumya-vapuh--beautiful form; maha-atma--the great one.
TRANSLATIONSanjaya said to Dhrtarastra: The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna,
while speaking thus to Arjuna, displayed His real four-armed form, andat last He showed him His two-armed form, thus encouraging the fearfulArjuna.
PURPORT
When Krsna appeared as the son of Vasudeva and Devaki, He first of all
appeared as four-armed Narayana, but when He was requested by Hisparents, He transformed Himself into an ordinary child in appearance.Similarly, Krsna knew that Arjuna was not interested in seeing a four-handed form of Krsna, but since he asked to see this four-handed form,He also showed him this form again and then showed Himself in His two-handed form. The word saumya-vapuh is very significant. Saumya-vapuh isa very beautiful form; it is known as the most beautiful form. When Hewas present, everyone was attracted simply by Krsna's form, and becauseKrsna is director of the universe, He just banished the fear of Arjuna,His devotee, and showed him again His beautiful form of Krsna. In theBrahma-samhita (5.38) it is stated, premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena: only a person whose eyes are smeared with the ointment oflove can see the beautiful form of Sri Krsna.
TEXT 51
arjuna uvaca
drstvedam manusam rupamtava saumyam janardanaidanim asmi samvrttahsa-cetah prakrtim gatah
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; drstva--seeing; idam--this; manusam--human
being; rupam--form; tava--Your; saumyam--very beautiful; janardana--Ochastiser of the enemies; idanim--just now; asmi--I am; samvrttah--settled; sa-cetah--in my consciousness; prakrtim--my own; gatah--I am.
TRANSLATIONWhen Arjuna thus saw Krsna in His original form, he said: Seeing this
humanlike form, so very beautiful, my mind is now pacified and I amrestored to my original nature.
PURPORTHere the words manusam rupam clearly indicate the Supreme Personality
of Godhead to be originally two-handed. Those who deride Krsna to be anordinary person are shown here to be ignorant of His divine nature. IfKrsna is like an ordinary human being, then how is it possible for Himto show the universal form and again to show the four-handed Narayanaform? So it is very clearly stated in Bhagavad-gita that one who thinksthat Krsna is an ordinary person and misguides the reader by claimingthat it is the impersonal Brahman within Krsna speaking, is doing thegreatest injustice. Krsna has actually shown His universal form and Hisfour-handed Visnu form. So how can He be an ordinary human being? Apure devotee is not confused by misguiding commentaries on Bhagavad-gita because he knows what is what. The original verses of Bhagavad-gita are as clear as the sun; they do not require lamp-light fromfoolish commentators.
TEXT 52
sri-bhagavan uvaca
su-durdarsam idam rupam
drstavan asi yan mama
deva apy asya rupasyanityam darsana-kanksinah
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; su-
durdarsam--very difficult to be seen; idam--this; rupam--form; drstavanasi--as you have seen; yat--which; mama--of Mine; devah--the demigods;api asya--also this; rupasya--form; nityam--eternally; darsana-kanksinah--always aspire to see.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: My dear Arjuna, the form which you are now
seeing is very difficult to behold. Even the demigods are ever seekingthe opportunity to see this form which is so dear.
PURPORTIn the forty-eighth verse of this chapter Lord Krsna concluded
revealing His universal form and informed Arjuna that this form is notpossible to be seen by so many activities, sacrifices, etc. Now herethe word su-durdarsam is used, indicating that Krsna's two-handed formis still more confidential. One may be able to see the universal formof Krsna by adding a little tinge of devotional service to variousactivities like penance, Vedic study and philosophical speculation,etc. It may be possible, but without a tinge of bhakti, one cannot see;that has already been explained. Still, beyond that universal form, theform of Krsna as a two-handed man is still more difficult to see, evenfor demigods like Brahma and Lord Siva. They desire to see Him, and wehave evidence in the Srimad-Bhagavatam that when He was supposed to bein the womb of His mother, Devaki, all the demigods from heaven came tosee the marvel of Krsna. They even waited to see Him. A foolish personmay deride Him, but that is an ordinary person. Krsna is actuallydesired to be seen by demigods like Brahma and Siva in His two-armedform.In Bhagavad-gita (9.11) it is also confirmed, avajananti mam mudhamanusim tanum asritah: He is not visible to the foolish persons whoderide Him. Krsna's body, as confirmed by Brahma-samhita and confirmedby Krsna Himself in Bhagavad-gita, is completely spiritual and full ofbliss and eternality. His body is never like a material body. But forsome who make a study of Krsna by reading Bhagavad-gita or similarVedic scriptures, Krsna is a problem. For one using a material process,Krsna is considered to be a great historical personality and verylearned philosopher. But He isn't an ordinary man. But some think thateven though He was so powerful, He had to accept a material body.Ultimately they think that the Absolute Truth is impersonal; thereforethey think that from His impersonal feature He assumed a personalfeature attached to material nature. This is a materialisticcalculation of the Supreme Lord. Another calculation is speculative.Those who are in search of knowledge also speculate on Krsna andconsider Him to be less important than the universal form of theSupreme. Thus some think that the universal form of Krsna which wasmanifested to Arjuna is more important than His personal form.According to them, the personal form of the Supreme is somethingimaginary. They believe that in the ultimate issue, the Absolute Truthis not a person. But the transcendental process is described in
Bhagavad-gita, Chapter Two: to hear about Krsna from authorities. That
is the actual Vedic process, and those who are actually in the Vedicline hear about Krsna from authority, and by repeated hearing aboutHim, Krsna becomes dear. As we have several times discussed, Krsna iscovered by His yoga-maya potency. He is not to be seen or revealed toanyone and everyone. Only by one to whom He reveals Himself can He beseen. This is confirmed in Vedic literature; for one who is asurrendered soul, the Absolute Truth can actually be understood. Thetranscendentalist, by continuous Krsna consciousness and devotionalservice to Krsna, can have his spiritual eyes opened and can see Krsnaby revelation. Such a revelation is not possible even for the demigods;therefore it is difficult even for the demigods to understand Krsna inHis two-handed form. The conclusion is that although to see theuniversal form of Krsna is very, very difficult and not possible foranyone and everyone, it is still more difficult to understand Hispersonal form as Syamasundara.
TEXT 53
naham vedair na tapasa
na danena na cejyayasakya evam-vidho drastumdrstavan asi mam yatha
SYNONYMSna--never; aham--I; vedaih--by study of the Vedas; na--never; tapasa--
by serious penances; na--never; danena--by charity; na--never; ca--also; ijyaya--by worship; sakyah--it is possible; evam-vidhah--likethis; drastum--to see; drstavan--seeing; asi--you are; mam--Me; yatha--as.
TRANSLATIONThe form which you are seeing with your transcendental eyes cannot be
understood simply by studying the Vedas, nor by undergoing seriouspenances, nor by charity, nor by worship. It is not by these means thatone can see Me as I am.
PURPORTKrsna first appeared before His parents Devaki and Vasudeva in a four-
handed form, and then He transformed Himself into the two-handed form.This mystery is very difficult to understand for those who are atheistsor who are devoid of devotional service. For scholars who have simplystudied Vedic literature by way of speculation or mere academicinterest, Krsna is not easy to understand. Nor is He to be understoodby persons who officially go to the temple to offer worship. They maketheir visit, but they cannot understand Krsna as He is. Krsna can beunderstood only through the path of devotional service, as explained byKrsna Himself in the next verse.
TEXT 54
bhaktya tv ananyaya sakya
aham evam-vidho 'rjunajnatum drastum ca tattvenapravestum ca parantapa
SYNONYMS
bhaktya--by devotional service; tu--but; ananyaya--without being mixed
with fruitive activities or speculative knowledge; sakyah--possible;aham--I; evam-vidhah--like this; arjuna--O Arjuna; jnatum--to know;drastum--to see; ca--and; tattvena--in fact; pravestum--and to enterinto; ca--also; parantapa--O mighty-armed one.
TRANSLATIONMy dear Arjuna, only by undivided devotional service can I be
understood as I am, standing before you, and can thus be seen directly.Only in this way can you enter into the mysteries of My understanding.
PURPORTKrsna can be understood only by the process of undivided devotional
service. He explicitly explains this in this verse so unauthorizedcommentators, who try to understand Bhagavad-gita by the speculativeprocess, will know that they are simply wasting their time. No one canunderstand Krsna or how He came from parents in a four-handed form andat once changed Himself into a two-handed form. It is clearly statedhere that no one can see Him. Those who, however, are very experiencedstudents of Vedic literature can learn about Him from the Vedicliterature in so many ways. There are so many rules and regulations,and if one at all wants to understand Krsna, he must follow theregulative principles described in the authoritative literature. Onecan perform penance in accordance with those principles. As far ascharity is concerned, it is plain that charity should be given to thedevotees of Krsna who are engaged in His devotional service to spreadthe Krsna philosophy or Krsna consciousness throughout the world. Krsnaconsciousness is a benediction to humanity. Lord Caitanya wasappreciated by Rupa Gosvami as the most munificent man of charitybecause love of Krsna, which is very difficult to achieve, wasdistributed freely by Him. And if one worships as prescribed in thetemple (in the temples in India there is always some statue, usually ofVisnu or Krsna), that is a chance to progress by offering worship andrespect to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For the beginners indevotional service to the Lord, temple worship is essential, and thisis confirmed in the Vedic literature.One who has unflinching devotion for the Supreme Lord and is directedby the spiritual master, can see the Supreme Personality of Godhead byrevelation. For one who does not take personal training under theguidance of a bona fide spiritual master, it is impossible to evenbegin to understand Krsna. The word tu is specifically used here toindicate that no other process can be used, can be recommended, or canbe successful in understanding Krsna.The personal forms of Krsna, the two-handed form and the four-handed,are completely different from the temporary universal form shown toArjuna. The four-handed form is Narayana and the two-handed form isKrsna; they are eternal and transcendental, whereas the universal formexhibited to Arjuna is temporary. The very word sudurdarsam, meaningdifficult to see, suggests that no one saw that universal form. It alsosuggests that amongst the devotees there was no necessity of showingit. That form was exhibited by Krsna at the request of Arjuna becausein the future, when one represents himself as an incarnation of God,people can ask to see his universal form.
Krsna changes from the universal form to the four-handed form of
Narayana and then to His own natural form of two hands. This indicatesthat the four-handed forms and other forms mentioned in Vedicliterature are all emanations of the original two-handed Krsna. He isthe origin of all emanations. Krsna is distinct even from these forms,what to speak of the impersonal conception. As far as the four-handedforms of Krsna are concerned, it is stated clearly that even the mostidentical four-handed form of Krsna (which is known as Maha-Visnu, whois lying on the cosmic ocean and from whose breathing so manyinnumerable universes are passing out and entering) is also anexpansion of the Supreme Lord. Therefore one should conclusivelyworship the personal form of Krsna as the Supreme Personality ofGodhead who is eternity, bliss and knowledge. He is the source of allforms of Visnu, He is the source of all forms of incarnation, and He isthe original Supreme Personality, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gita.In the Vedic literature it is stated that the Supreme Absolute Truth isa person. His name is Krsna, and He sometimes descends on this earth.Similarly, in Srimad-Bhagavatam there is a description of all kinds ofincarnations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and there it issaid that Krsna is not an incarnation of God but is the originalSupreme Personality of Godhead Himself (krsnas tu bhagavan svayam).Similarly, in Bhagavad-gita the Lord says, mattah parataram nanyat:"There is nothing superior to My form as the Personality of GodheadKrsna." He also says elsewhere in Bhagavad-gita, aham adir hi devanam:"I am the origin of all the demigods." And after understandingBhagavad-gita from Krsna, Arjuna also confirms this in the followingwords: param brahma param dhama pavitram-paramam bhavan: "I now fullyunderstand that You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, theAbsolute Truth, and that You are the refuge of everything." Thereforethe universal form which Krsna showed to Arjuna is not the originalform of God. The original is the Krsna form. The universal form, withits thousands and thousands of heads and hands, is manifest just todraw the attention of those who have no love for God. It is not God'soriginal form.The universal form is not attractive for pure devotees, who are in lovewith the Lord in different transcendental relationships. The SupremeGodhead exchanges transcendental love in His original form of Krsna.Therefore to Arjuna, who was so intimately related with Krsna infriendship, this form of the universal manifestation was not pleasing;rather, it was fearful. Arjuna, who is a constant companion of Krsna's,must have had transcendental eyes; he was not an ordinary man.Therefore he was not captivated by the universal form. This form mayseem wonderful to persons who are involved in elevating themselves byfruitive activities, but to persons who are engaged in devotionalservice, the two-handed form of Krsna is the most dear.
TEXT 55
mat-karma-krn mat-paramo
mad-bhaktah sanga-varjitahnirvairah sarva-bhutesuyah sa mam eti pandava
SYNONYMSmat-karma-krt--engaged in doing My work; mat-paramah--considering Me
the Supreme; mat-bhaktah--engaged in My devotional service; sanga-varjitah--freed from the contamination of previous activities and
mental speculation; nirvairah--without an enemy; sarva-bhutesu--to
every living entity yah--one who; sah--he; mam--unto Me; eti--comes;pandava--O son of Pandu.
TRANSLATIONMy dear Arjuna, one who is engaged in My pure devotional service, free
from the contaminations of previous activities and from mentalspeculation, who is friendly to every living entity, certainly comes toMe.
PURPORTAnyone who wants to approach the supreme of all the Personalities of
Godhead, on the Krsnaloka planet in the spiritual sky, and beintimately connected with the Supreme Personality, Krsna, must takethis formula, as is stated by the Supreme Himself. Therefore, thisverse is considered to be the essence of Bhagavad-gita. The Bhagavad-gita is a book directed to the conditioned souls, who are engaged inthe material world with the purpose of lording it over nature and whodo not know of the real, spiritual life. The Bhagavad-gita is meant toshow how one can understand his spiritual existence and his eternalrelationship with the supreme spiritual personality and to teach onehow to go back home, back to Godhead. Now here is the verse whichclearly explains the process by which one can attain success in hisspiritual activity: devotional service.As far as work is concerned, one should transfer his energy entirely toKrsna conscious activities. No work should be done by any man except inrelationship to Krsna. This is called krsna-karma. One may be engagedin various activities, but one should not be attached to the result ofhis work, but the result should be done for Him. For example, one maybe engaged in business, but to transform that activity into Krsnaconsciousness, one has to do business for Krsna. If Krsna is theproprietor of the business, then Krsna should enjoy the profit of thebusiness. If a businessman is in possession of thousands and thousandsof dollars, and if he has to offer all this to Krsna, he can do it.This is work for Krsna. Instead of constructing a big building for hissense gratification, he can construct a nice temple for Krsna, and hecan install the Deity of Krsna and arrange for the Deity's service, asis outlined in the authorized books of devotional service. This is allkrsna-karma. One should not be attached to the result of his work, butthe result should be offered to Krsna. One should also accept asprasadam, food, the remnants of offerings to Krsna. If one constructs avery big building for Krsna and installs the Deity of Krsna, one is notprohibited from living there, but it is understood that the proprietorof the building is Krsna. That is called Krsna consciousness. If,however, one is not able to construct a temple for Krsna, one canengage himself in cleansing the temple of Krsna; that is also krsna-karma. One can cultivate a garden. Anyone who has land--in India, atleast, any poor man has a certain amount of land--can utilize that forKrsna by growing flowers to offer Him. One can sow tulasi plants,because tulasi leaves are very important, and Krsna has recommendedthis in Bhagavad-gita. Patram puspam phalam toyam. Krsna desires thatone offer Him either a leaf, or a flower, or fruit, or a little water--and He is satisfied. This leaf especially refers to the tulasi. So onecan sow tulasi and pour water on the plant. Thus, even the poorest mancan engage in the service of Krsna. These are some of the examples ofhow one can engage in working for Krsna.
The word mat-paramah refers to one who considers the association of
Krsna in His supreme abode to be the highest perfection of life. Such aperson does not wish to be elevated to the higher planets such as themoon or sun or heavenly planets, or even the highest planet of thisuniverse, Brahmaloka. He has no attraction for that. He is onlyattracted to being transferred to the spiritual sky. And even in thespiritual sky he is not satisfied with merging into the glowingbrahmajyoti effulgence, for he wants to enter into the highestspiritual planet, namely Krsnaloka, Goloka Vrndavana. He has fullknowledge of that planet, and therefore he is not interested in anyother. As indicated by the word mad-bhaktah, he fully engages indevotional service, specifically in the nine processes of devotionalengagement: hearing, chanting, remembering, worshiping, serving thelotus feet of the Lord, offering prayers, carrying out the orders ofthe Lord, making friends with Him, and surrendering everything to Him.One can engage in all nine devotional processes, or eight, or seven, orat least in one, and that will surely make one perfect.The term sanga-varjitah is very significant. One should disassociatehimself from persons who are against Krsna. Not only are the atheisticpersons against Krsna, but so also are those who are attracted tofruitive activities and mental speculation. Therefore the pure form ofdevotional service is described in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.1.11) asfollows:
anyabhilasita-sunyam
jnana-karmady-anavrtamanukulyena krsnanu-silanam bhaktir uttama
In this verse Srila Rupa Gosvami clearly states that if anyone wants to
execute unalloyed devotional service, he must be freed from all kindsof material contamination. He must be freed from the association ofpersons who are addicted to fruitive activities and mental speculation.When, freed from such unwanted association and from the contaminationof material desires, one favorably cultivates knowledge of Krsna, thatis called pure devotional service. Anukulyasya sankalpah pratikulyasyavarjanam (Hari-bhakti-vilasa 11.676). One should think of Krsna and actfor Krsna favorably, not unfavorably. Kamsa was an enemy of Krsna's.From the very beginning of Krsna's birth, he planned in so many ways tokill Him, and because he was always unsuccessful, he was alwaysthinking of Krsna. Thus while working, while eating and while sleeping,he was always Krsna conscious in every respect, but that Krsnaconsciousness was not favorable, and therefore in spite of his alwaysthinking of Krsna twenty-four hours a day, he was considered a demon,and Krsna at last killed him. Of course anyone who is killed by Krsnaattains salvation immediately, but that is not the aim of the puredevotee. The pure devotee does not even want salvation. He does notwant to be transferred even to the highest planet, Goloka Vrndavana.His only objective is to serve Krsna wherever he may be.A devotee of Krsna is friendly to everyone. Therefore it is said herethat he has no enemy (nirvairah). How is this? A devotee situated inKrsna consciousness knows that only devotional service to Krsna canrelieve a person from all the problems of life. He has personalexperience of this, and therefore he wants to introduce this system,Krsna consciousness, into human society. There are many examples inhistory of devotees of the Lord risking their lives for the spreadingof God consciousness. The favorite example is Lord Jesus Christ. He wascrucified by the nondevotees, but he sacrificed his life for spreading
God consciousness. Of course, it would be superficial to understand
that he was killed. Similarly, in India also there are many examples,such as Thakura Haridasa and Prahlada Maharaja. Why such risk? Becausethey wanted to spread Krsna consciousness, and it is difficult. A Krsnaconscious person knows that if a man is suffering, it is due to hisforgetfulness of his eternal relationship with Krsna. Therefore, thehighest benefit one can render to human society is relieving one'sneighbor from all material problems. In such a way, a pure devotee isengaged in the service of the Lord. Now, we can imagine how mercifulKrsna is to those engaged in His service, risking everything for Him.Therefore it is certain that such persons must reach the supreme planetafter leaving the body.In summary, the universal form of Krsna, which is a temporarymanifestation, and the form of time which devours everything, and eventhe form of Visnu, four-handed, have all been exhibited by Krsna. ThusKrsna is the origin of all these manifestations. It is not that Krsnais a manifestation of the original visva-rupa, or Visnu. Krsna is theorigin of all forms. There are hundreds and thousands of Visnus, butfor a devotee, no form of Krsna is important but the original form,two-handed Syamasundara. In the Brahma-samhita it is stated that thosewho are attached to the Syamasundara form of Krsna in love and devotioncan see Him always within the heart and cannot see anything else. Oneshould understand, therefore, that the purport of this Eleventh Chapteris that the form of Krsna is essential and supreme.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Eleventh Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of the Universal Form.
Chapter 12
Devotional Service
TEXT 1
arjuna uvaca
evam satata-yukta yebhaktas tvam paryupasateye capy aksaram avyaktamtesam ke yoga-vittamah
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; evam--thus; satata--always; yuktah--
engaged; ye--those; bhaktah--devotees; tvam--unto You; paryupasate--properly worship; ye--those; ca--also; api--again; aksaram--beyond thesenses; avyaktam--unmanifested; tesam--of them; ke--who; yoga-vit-tamah--the most perfect.
TRANSLATIONArjuna inquired: What is considered to be more perfect, those who are
properly engaged in Your devotional service, or those who worship theimpersonal Brahman, the unmanifested?
PURPORTKrsna has now explained about the personal, the impersonal and the
universal and has described all kinds of devotees and yogis. Generally,the transcendentalists can be divided into two classes. One is the
impersonalist, and the other is the personalist. The personalist
devotee engages himself with all energy in the service of the SupremeLord. The impersonalist engages himself not directly in the service ofKrsna but in meditation on the impersonal Brahman, the unmanifested.We find in this chapter that of the different processes for realizationof the Absolute Truth, bhakti-yoga, devotional service, is the highest.If one at all desires to have the association of the SupremePersonality of Godhead, then he must take to devotional service.Those who worship the Supreme Lord directly by devotional service arecalled personalists. Those who engage themselves in meditation on theimpersonal Brahman are called impersonalists. Arjuna is herequestioning which position is better. There are different ways torealize the Absolute Truth, but Krsna indicates in this chapter thatbhakti-yoga, or devotional service to Him, is highest of all. It is themost direct, and it is the easiest means for association with theGodhead.In the Second Chapter the Lord explains that a living entity is not thematerial body but is a spiritual spark, a part of the Absolute Truth.In the Seventh Chapter He speaks of the living entity as part andparcel of the supreme whole and recommends that he transfer hisattention fully to the whole. In the Eighth Chapter it is stated thatwhoever thinks of Krsna at the moment of death is at once transferredto the spiritual sky, Krsna's abode. And at the end of the SixthChapter the Lord says that out of all the yogis, he who thinks of Krsnawithin himself is considered to be the most perfect. So throughout theGita personal devotion to Krsna is recommended as the highest form ofspiritual realization. Yet there are those who are still attracted toKrsna's impersonal brahmajyoti effulgence, which is the all-pervasiveaspect of the Absolute Truth and which is unmanifest and beyond thereach of the senses. Arjuna would like to know which of these two typesof transcendentalists is more perfect in knowledge. In other words, heis clarifying his own position because he is attached to the personalform of Krsna. He is not attached to the impersonal Brahman. He wantsto know whether his position is secure. The impersonal manifestation,either in this material world or in the spiritual world of the SupremeLord, is a problem for meditation. Actually one cannot perfectlyconceive of the impersonal feature of the Absolute Truth. ThereforeArjuna wants to say, "What is the use of such a waste of time?" Arjunaexperienced in the Eleventh Chapter that to be attached to the personalform of Krsna is best because he could thus understand all other formsat the same time and there was no disturbance to his love for Krsna.This important question asked of Krsna by Arjuna will clarify thedistinction between the impersonal and personal conceptions of theAbsolute Truth.
TEXT 2
sri-bhagavan uvaca
mayy avesya mano ye mamnitya-yukta upasatesraddhaya parayopetaste me yuktatama matah
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; mayi--unto
Me; avesya--fixing; manah--mind; ye--one who; mam--unto Me; nitya--always; yuktah--engaged; upasate--worships; sraddhaya--with faith;
paraya--transcendental; upetah--engages; te--they; me--Me; yukta-tamah-
-most perfect; matah--I consider.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: He whose mind is fixed on My personal form,
always engaged in worshiping Me with great and transcendental faith, isconsidered by Me to be most perfect.
PURPORTIn answer to Arjuna's question, Krsna clearly says that he who
concentrates upon His personal form and who worships Him with faith anddevotion is to be considered the most perfect in yoga. For one in suchKrsna consciousness there are no material activities because everythingis done for Krsna. A pure devotee is constantly engaged. Sometimes hechants, sometimes he hears or reads books about Krsna, or sometimes hecooks prasadam or goes to the marketplace to purchase something forKrsna, or sometimes he washes the temple or the dishes--whatever hedoes, he does not let a single moment pass without devoting hisactivities to Krsna. Such action is in full samadhi.
TEXTS 3-4
ye tv aksaram anirdesyam
avyaktam paryupasatesarvatra-gam acintyam cakuta-stham acalam dhruvam
sanniyamyendriya-gramam
sarvatra sama-buddhayahte prapnuvanti mam evasarva-bhuta-hite ratah
SYNONYMSye--those; tu--but; aksaram--which is beyond the perception of the
senses; anirdesyam--indefinite; avyaktam--unmanifested; paryupasate--completely engages; sarvatra-gam--all-pervading; acintyam--inconceivable; ca--also; kuta-stham--in the center; acalam--immovable;dhruvam--fixed; sanniyamya--controlling; indriya-gramam--all thesenses; sarvatra--everywhere; sama-buddhayah--equally disposed; te--they; prapnuvanti--achieve; mam--unto Me; eva--certainly; sarva-bhuta-hite--all living entities' welfare; ratah--engaged.
TRANSLATIONBut those who fully worship the unmanifested, that which lies beyond
the perception of the senses, the all-pervading, inconceivable, fixedand immovable--the impersonal conception of the Absolute Truth--bycontrolling the various senses and being equally disposed to everyone,such persons, engaged in the welfare of all, at last achieve Me.
PURPORTThose who do not directly worship the Supreme Godhead, Krsna, but who
attempt to achieve the same goal by an indirect process, alsoultimately achieve the supreme goal, Sri Krsna, as is stated, "After
many births the man of wisdom seeks refuge in Me, knowing that Vasudeva
is all." When a person comes to full knowledge after many births, hesurrenders unto Lord Krsna. If one approaches the Godhead by the methodmentioned in this verse, he has to control the senses, render serviceto everyone and engage in the welfare of all beings. It is inferredthat one has to approach Lord Krsna, otherwise there is no perfectrealization. Often there is much penance involved before one fullysurrenders unto Him.In order to perceive the Supersoul within the individual soul, one hasto cease the sensual activities of seeing, hearing, tasting, working,etc. Then one comes to understand that the Supreme Soul is presenteverywhere. Realizing this, one envies no living entity--he sees nodifference between man and animal because he sees soul only, not theouter covering. But for the common man, this method of impersonalrealization is very difficult.
TEXT 5
kleso 'dhikataras tesam
avyaktasakta-cetasamavyakta hi gatir duhkhamdehavadbhir avapyate
SYNONYMSklesah--trouble; adhika-tarah--more troublesome; tesam--of them;
avyakta--to unmanifested; asakta--being attached; cetasam--of thosewhose minds; avyakta--toward the unmanifested; hi--certainly; gatihduhkham--progress is troublesome; deha-vadbhih--of the embodiments;avapyate--achieve.
TRANSLATIONFor those whose minds are attached to the unmanifested, impersonal
feature of the Supreme, advancement is very troublesome. To makeprogress in that discipline is always difficult for those who areembodied.
PURPORTThe group of transcendentalists who follow the path of the
inconceivable, unmanifested, impersonal feature of the Supreme Lord arecalled jnana-yogis, and persons who are in full Krsna consciousness,engaged in devotional service to the Lord, are called bhakti-yogis.Now, here the difference between jnana-yoga and bhakti-yoga isdefinitely expressed. The process of jnana-yoga, although ultimatelybringing one to the same goal, is very troublesome, whereas the path ofbhakti-yoga, the process of being in direct service to the SupremePersonality of Godhead, is easier and is natural for the embodied soul.The individual soul is embodied since time immemorial. It is verydifficult for him to simply theoretically understand that he is not thebody. Therefore, the bhakti-yogi accepts the Deity of Krsna asworshipable because there is some bodily conception fixed in the mind,which can thus be applied. Of course, worshiping the SupremePersonality of Godhead in His form within the temple is not idolworship. There is evidence in the Vedic literature that worship may besaguna and nirguna--of the Supreme possessing or not possessingattributes. Worship of the Deity in the temple is saguna worship, for
the Lord is represented by material qualities. But the form of the
Lord, though represented by material qualities such as stone, wood oroil paint, is not actually material. That is the absolute nature of theSupreme Lord.A crude example may be given here. We may find some mailboxes on thestreet, and if we post our letters in those boxes, they will naturallygo to their destination without difficulty. But any old box, or animitation, which we may find somewhere, which is not authorized by thepost office, will not do the work. Similarly, God has an authorizedrepresentation in the Deity form, which is called arca-vigraha. Thisarca-vigraha is an incarnation of the Supreme Lord. God will acceptservice through that form. The Lord is omnipotent and all-powerful;therefore, by His incarnation as arca-vigraha, He can accept theservices of the devotee, just to make it convenient for the man inconditioned life.So, for a devotee, there is no difficulty in approaching the Supremeimmediately and directly, but for those who are following theimpersonal way to spiritual realization, the path is difficult. Theyhave to understand the unmanifested representation of the Supremethrough such Vedic literatures as the Upanisads, and they have to learnthe language, understand the nonperceptual feelings, and they have torealize all these processes. This is not very easy for a common man. Aperson in Krsna consciousness, engaged in devotional service, simply bythe guidance of the bona fide spiritual master, simply by offeringregulative obeisances unto the Deity, simply by hearing the glories ofthe Lord, and simply by eating the remnants of foodstuffs offered tothe Lord, realizes the Supreme Personality of Godhead very easily.There is no doubt that the impersonalists are unnecessarily taking atroublesome path with the risk of not realizing the Absolute Truth atthe ultimate end. But the personalist, without any risk, trouble, ordifficulty, approaches the Supreme Personality directly. A similarpassage appears in Srimad-Bhagavatam. It is stated there that if oneultimately has to surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead(this surrendering process is called bhakti), but instead takes thetrouble to understand what is Brahman and what is not Brahman andspends his whole life in that way, the result is simply troublesome.Therefore it is advised here that one should not take up thistroublesome path of self-realization because there is uncertainty inthe ultimate result.A living entity is eternally an individual soul, and if he wants tomerge into the spiritual whole, he may accomplish the realization ofthe eternal and knowledgeable aspects of his original nature, but theblissful portion is not realized. By the grace of some devotee, such atranscendentalist, highly learned in the process of jnana-yoga, maycome to the point of bhakti-yoga, or devotional service. At that time,long practice in impersonalism also becomes a source of trouble,because he cannot give up the idea. Therefore an embodied soul isalways in difficulty with the unmanifest, both at the time of practiceand at the time of realization. Every living soul is partiallyindependent, and one should know for certain that this unmanifestedrealization is against the nature of his spiritual blissful self. Oneshould not take up this process. For every individual living entity theprocess of Krsna consciousness, which entails full engagement indevotional service, is the best way. If one wants to ignore thisdevotional service, there is the danger of turning to atheism. Thusthis process of centering attention on the unmanifested, theinconceivable, which is beyond the approach of the senses, as already
expressed in this verse, should never be encouraged at any time,
especially in this age. It is not advised by Lord Krsna.
TEXTS 6-7
ye tu sarvani karmani
mayi sannyasya mat-parahananyenaiva yogenamam dhyayanta upasate
tesam aham samuddharta
mrtyu-samsara-sagaratbhavami na cirat parthamayy avesita-cetasam
SYNONYMSye--one who; tu--but; sarvani--everything; karmani--activities; mayi--
unto Me; sannyasya--giving up; mat-parah--being attached to Me;ananyena--without division; eva--certainly; yogena--by practice of suchbhakti-yoga; mam--unto Me; dhyayantah--meditating; upasate--worship;tesam--of them; aham--I; samuddharta--deliverer; mrtyu--death; samsara--material existence; sagarat--from the ocean; bhavami--become; nacirat--not a long time; partha--O son of Prtha; mayi--unto Me; avesita--fixed; cetasam--of those whose minds are like that.
TRANSLATIONFor one who worships Me, giving up all his activities unto Me and being
devoted to Me without deviation, engaged in devotional service andalways meditating upon Me, who has fixed his mind upon Me, O son ofPrtha--for him I am the swift deliverer from the ocean of birth anddeath.
PURPORTIt is explicitly stated here that the devotees are very fortunate to be
delivered very soon from material existence by the Lord. In puredevotional service one comes to the realization that God is great andthat the individual soul is subordinate to Him. His duty is to renderservice to the Lord--if not, then he will render service to maya.As stated before, the Supreme Lord can only be appreciated bydevotional service. Therefore, one should be fully devoted. One shouldfix his mind fully on Krsna in order to achieve Him. One should workonly for Krsna. It does not matter in what kind of work one engages,but that work should be done only for Krsna. That is the standard ofdevotional service. The devotee does not desire any achievement otherthan pleasing the Supreme Personality of Godhead. His life's mission isto please Krsna, and he can sacrifice everything for Krsna'ssatisfaction, just as Arjuna did in the Battle of Kuruksetra. Theprocess is very simple: one can devote himself in his occupation andengage at the same time in chanting Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, KrsnaKrsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. Suchtranscendental chanting attracts the devotee to the Personality ofGodhead.The Supreme Lord herein promises that He will without delay deliver apure devotee thus engaged from the ocean of material existence. Thosewho are advanced in yoga practice can willfully transfer the soul to
whatever planet they like by the yoga process, and others take the
opportunity in various ways, but as far as the devotee is concerned, itis clearly stated here that the Lord Himself takes him. He does notneed to wait to become very experienced in order to transfer himself tothe spiritual sky.In the Varaha Purana this verse appears:
nayami paramam sthanam
arcir-adi-gatim vinagaruda-skandham aropyayatheccham anivaritah
The purport of this verse is that a devotee does not need to practice
astanga-yoga in order to transfer his soul to the spiritual planets.The responsibility is taken by the Supreme Lord Himself. He clearlystates here that He Himself becomes the deliverer. A child iscompletely cared for by his parents, and thus his position is secure.Similarly, a devotee does not need to endeavor to transfer himself byyoga practice to other planets. Rather, the Supreme Lord, by His greatmercy, comes at once, riding on His bird carrier Garuda, and at oncedelivers the devotee from this material existence. Although a man whohas fallen in the ocean may struggle very hard and may be very expertin swimming, he cannot save himself. But if someone comes and picks himup from the water, then he is easily rescued. Similarly, the Lord picksup the devotee from this material existence. One simply has to practicethe easy process of Krsna consciousness and fully engage himself indevotional service. Any intelligent man should always prefer theprocess of devotional service to all other paths. In the Narayaniyathis is confirmed as follows:
ya vai sadhana-sampattih
purusartha-catustayetaya vina tad apnotinaro narayanasrayah
The purport of this verse is that one should not engage in the
different processes of fruitive activity or cultivate knowledge by themental speculative process. One who is devoted to the SupremePersonality can attain all the benefits derived from other yogicprocesses, speculation, rituals, sacrifices, charities, etc. That isthe specific benediction of devotional service.Simply by chanting the holy name of Krsna--Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna,Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare--adevotee of the Lord can approach the supreme destination easily andhappily, but this destination cannot be approached by any other processof religion.The conclusion of Bhagavad-gita is stated in the Eighteenth Chapter:
sarva-dharman parityajya
mam ekam saranam vrajaaham tvam sarva-papebhyomoksayisyami ma sucah
One should give up all other processes of self-realization and simply
execute devotional service in Krsna consciousness. That will enable oneto reach the highest perfection of life. There is no need for one toconsider the sinful actions of his past life because the Supreme Lordfully takes charge of him. Therefore one should not futilely try to
deliver himself in spiritual realization. Let everyone take shelter of
the supreme omnipotent Godhead, Krsna. That is the highest perfectionof life.
TEXT 8
mayy eva mana adhatsva
mayi buddhim nivesayanivasisyasi mayy evaata urdhvam na samsayah
SYNONYMSmayi--unto Me; eva--certainly; manah--mind; adhatsva--fix; mayi--upon
Me; buddhim--intelligence; nivesaya--apply; nivasisyasi--you live;mayi--unto Me; eva--certainly; atah urdhvam--thereafter; na--never;samsayah--doubt.
TRANSLATIONJust fix your mind upon Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
engage all your intelligence in Me. Thus you will live with Me always,without a doubt.
PURPORTOne who is engaged in Lord Krsna's devotional service lives in a direct
relationship with the Supreme Lord, so there is no doubt that hisposition is transcendental from the very beginning. A devotee does notlive on the material plane--he lives in Krsna. The holy name of theLord and the Lord are nondifferent; therefore when a devotee chantsHare Krsna, Krsna and His internal potency are dancing on the tongue ofthe devotee. When he offers Krsna food, Krsna directly accepts theseeatables, and the devotee becomes Krsna-ized by eating the remnants.One who does not engage in such service cannot understand how this isso, although this is a process recommended in the Bhagavad-gita and inother Vedic literatures.
TEXT 9
atha cittam samadhatum
na saknosi mayi sthiramabhyasa-yogena tatomam icchaptum dhananjaya
SYNONYMSatha--if, therefore; cittam--mind; samadhatum--fixing; na--not;
saknosi--able; mayi--upon Me; sthiram--fixed; abhyasa--practice;yogena--by devotional service; tatah--therefore; mam--Me; iccha--desire; aptum--to get; dhanam-jaya--O Arjuna.
TRANSLATIONMy dear Arjuna, O winner of wealth, if you cannot fix your mind upon Me
without deviation, then follow the regulative principles of bhakti-yoga. In this way you will develop a desire to attain to Me.
PURPORT
In this verse, two different processes of bhakti-yoga are indicated.
The first applies to one who has actually developed an attachment forKrsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by transcendental love. Andthe other is for one who has not developed an attachment for theSupreme Person by transcendental love. For this second class there aredifferent prescribed rules and regulations one can follow to beultimately elevated to the stage of attachment to Krsna.Bhakti-yoga is the purification of the senses. At the present moment inmaterial existence the senses are always impure, being engaged in sensegratification. But, by the practice of bhakti-yoga these senses canbecome purified, and in the purified state they come directly incontact with the Supreme Lord. In this material existence, I may beengaged in some service to some master, but I don't really lovinglyserve my master. I simply serve to get some money. And the master alsois not in love; he takes service from me and pays me. So there is noquestion of love. But for spiritual life, one must be elevated to thepure stage of love. That stage of love can be achieved by practice ofdevotional service, performed with the present senses.This love of God is now in a dormant state in everyone's heart. And,there, love of God is manifested in different ways, but it iscontaminated by material association. Now the material association hasto be purified, and that dormant, natural love for Krsna has to berevived. That is the whole process.To practice the regulative principles of bhakti-yoga one should, underthe guidance of an expert spiritual master, follow certain principles:one should rise early in the morning, take bath, enter the temple andoffer prayers and chant Hare Krsna, then collect flowers to offer tothe Deity, cook foodstuffs to offer to the Deity, take prasadam, and soon. There are various rules and regulations which one should follow.And one should constantly hear Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam frompure devotees. This practice can help anyone to rise to the level oflove of God, and then he is sure of his progress into the spiritualkingdom of God. This practice of bhakti-yoga, under the rules andregulations, with the direction of a spiritual master, will surelybring one to the stage of love of God.
TEXT 10
abhyase 'py asamartho 'si
mat-karma-paramo bhavamad-artham api karmanikurvan siddhim avapsyasi
SYNONYMSabhyase--in practice of; api--even; asamarthah--unable; asi--you are;
mat-karma--My work; paramah--supreme; bhava--you become; mat-artham--for My sake; api--even though; karmani--work; kurvan--performing;siddhim--perfection; avapsyasi--achieve.
TRANSLATIONIf you cannot practice the regulations of bhakti-yoga, then just try to
work for Me, because by working for Me you will come to the perfectstage.
PURPORT
One who is not able even to practice the regulative principles of
bhakti-yoga, under the guidance of a spiritual master, can still bedrawn to this perfectional stage by working for the Supreme Lord. Howto do this work has already been explained in the fifty-fifth verse ofthe Eleventh Chapter. One should be sympathetic to the propagation ofKrsna consciousness. There are many devotees who are engaged in thepropagation of Krsna consciousness, and they require help. So, even ifone cannot directly practice the regulative principles of bhakti-yoga,he can try to help such work. Every endeavor requires land, capital,organization and labor. Just as in business one requires a place tostay, some capital to use, some labor and some organization to expand,so the same is required in the service of Krsna. The only difference isthat in materialism one works for sense gratification. The same work,however, can be performed for the satisfaction of Krsna, and that isspiritual activity. If one has sufficient money, he can help inbuilding an office or temple for propagating Krsna consciousness. Or hecan help with publications. There are various fields of activity, andone should be interested in such activities. If one cannot sacrificethe results of his activities, the same person can still sacrifice somepercentage to propagate Krsna consciousness. This voluntary service tothe cause of Krsna consciousness will help one rise to a higher stateof love for God, whereupon one becomes perfect.
TEXT 11
athaitad apy asakto 'si
kartum mad-yogam asritahsarva-karma-phala-tyagamtatah kuru yatatmavan
SYNONYMSatha--even though; etat--this; api--also; asaktah--unable; asi--you
are; kartum--to perform; mat--unto Me; yogam--devotional service;asritah--refuge; sarva-karma--all activities; phala--result; tyagam--renunciation; tatah--therefore; kuru--do; yata-atma-van--self-situated.
TRANSLATIONIf, however, you are unable to work in this consciousness, then try to
act giving up all results of your work and try to be self-situated.
PURPORTIt may be that one is unable to even sympathize with the activities of
Krsna consciousness because of social, familial or religiousconsiderations or because of some other impediments. If one attacheshimself directly to the activities of Krsna consciousness, there may beobjections from family members, or so many other difficulties. For onewho has such a problem, it is advised that he sacrifice the accumulatedresult of his activities to some good cause. Such procedures aredescribed in the Vedic rules. There are many descriptions of sacrificesand special functions of punya, or special work in which the result ofone's previous action may be applied. Thus one may gradually becomeelevated to the state of knowledge. It is also found that when one whois not even interested in the activities of Krsna consciousness gives
charity to some hospital or some other social institution, he gives up
the hard-earned results of his activities. That is also recommendedhere because by the practice of giving up the fruits of one'sactivities one is sure to purify his mind gradually, and in thatpurified stage of mind one becomes able to understand Krsnaconsciousness. Of course Krsna consciousness is not dependent on anyother experience, because Krsna consciousness itself can purify one'smind, but if there are impediments to accepting Krsna consciousness,one may try to give up the results of his actions. In that respect,social service, community service, national service, sacrifice forone's country, etc., may be accepted so that some day one may come tothe stage of pure devotional service to the Supreme Lord. In Bhagavad-gita (18.46) we find it is stated, yatah pravrttir bhutanam: if onedecides to sacrifice for the supreme cause, even if he does not knowthat the supreme cause is Krsna, he will come gradually to understandthat Krsna is the supreme cause by the sacrificial method.
TEXT 12
sreyo hi jnanam abhyasaj
jnanad dhyanam visisyatedhyanat karma-phala-tyagastyagac chantir anantaram
SYNONYMSsreyah--better; hi--certainly; jnanam--knowledge; abhyasat--by
practice; jnanat--better than knowledge; dhyanam--meditation;visisyate--especially considered; dhyanat--from meditation; karma-phala-tyagah--renunciation of the results of fruitive action; tyagat--by such renunciation; santih--peace; anantaram--thereafter.
TRANSLATIONIf you cannot take to this practice, then engage yourself in the
cultivation of knowledge. Better than knowledge, however, ismeditation, and better than meditation is renunciation of the fruits ofaction, for by such renunciation one can attain peace of mind.
PURPORTAs mentioned in the previous verses, there are two kinds of devotional
service: the way of regulative principles and the way of fullattachment in love to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For those whoare actually not able to follow the principles of Krsna consciousnessit is better to cultivate knowledge because by knowledge one can beable to understand his real position. Gradually knowledge will developto the point of meditation. By meditation one can be able to understandthe Supreme Personality of Godhead by a gradual process. There areprocesses which make one understand that one himself is the Supreme,and that sort of meditation is preferred if one is unable to engage indevotional service. If one is not able to meditate in such a way, thenthere are prescribed duties, as enjoined in the Vedic literature, forthe brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas and sudras, which we shall find in alater chapter of Bhagavad-gita. But in all cases, one should give upthe result or fruits of labor; this means to employ the result of karmafor some good cause.
In summary, to reach the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the highest
goal, there are two processes: one process is by gradual development,and the other process is direct. Devotional service in Krsnaconsciousness is the direct method, and the other method involvesrenouncing the fruits of one's activities. Then one can come to thestage of knowledge, then to the stage of meditation, then to the stageof understanding the Supersoul, and then to the stage of the SupremePersonality of Godhead. One may either take the step by step process orthe direct path. The direct process is not possible for everyone;therefore the indirect process is also good. It is, however, to beunderstood that the indirect process is not recommended for Arjunabecause he is already at the stage of loving devotional service to theSupreme Lord. It is for others who are not at this stage; for them thegradual process of renunciation, knowledge, meditation and realizationof the Supersoul and Brahman should be followed. But as far asBhagavad-gita is concerned, it is the direct method that is stressed.Everyone is advised to take to the direct method and surrender unto theSupreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna.
TEXTS 13-14
advesta sarva-bhutanam
maitrah karuna eva canirmamo nirahankarahsama-duhkha-sukhah ksami
santustah satatam yogi
yatatma drdha-niscayahmayy arpita-mano-buddhiryo mad-bhaktah sa me priyah
SYNONYMSadvesta--nonenvious; sarva-bhutanam--for all living entities; maitrah--
friendly; karunah--kindly; eva--certainly; ca--also; nirmamah--with nosense of proprietorship; nirahankarah--without false ego; sama--equally; duhkha--distress; sukhah--happiness; ksami--forgiving;santustah--satisfied; satatam--always; yogi--engaged in devotion; yata-atma--self-controlled; drdha-niscayah--with determination; mayi--uponMe; arpita--engaged; manah--mind; buddhih--intelligence; yah--one who;mat-bhaktah--My devotee; sah me priyah--he is dear to Me.
TRANSLATIONOne who is not envious but who is a kind friend to all living entities,
who does not think himself a proprietor, who is free from false ego andequal both in happiness and distress, who is always satisfied andengaged in devotional service with determination and whose mind andintelligence are in agreement with Me--he is very dear to Me.
PURPORTComing again to the point of pure devotional service, the Lord is
describing the transcendental qualifications of a pure devotee in thesetwo verses. A pure devotee is never disturbed in any circumstances. Noris he envious of anyone. Nor does a devotee become his enemy's enemy;he thinks that one is acting as his enemy due to his own past misdeeds.Thus it is better to suffer than to protest. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam
(10.14.8) it is stated: tat te 'nukampam susamiksamano. Whenever a
devotee is in distress or has fallen into difficulty, he thinks that itis the Lord's mercy upon him. He thinks: "Thanks to my past misdeeds Ishould suffer far, far greater than I am suffering now. So it is by themercy of the Supreme Lord that I am not getting all the punishment I amdue. I am just getting a little, by the mercy of the SupremePersonality of Godhead." Therefore he is always calm, quiet andpatient, despite many distressful conditions. A devotee is always kindto everyone, even to his enemy. Nirmama means that a devotee does notattach much importance to the pains and trouble pertaining to the bodybecause he knows perfectly well that he is not the material body. Hedoes not identify with the body; therefore he is freed from theconception of false ego and is equipoised both in happiness anddistress. He is tolerant, and he is satisfied with whatever comes bythe grace of the Supreme Lord. He does not endeavor much to achievesomething with great difficulty; therefore he is always joyful. He is acompletely perfect mystic because he is fixed in the instructionsreceived from the spiritual master, and because his senses arecontrolled, he is determined. He is not swayed by false argumentbecause no one can lead him from the fixed determination of devotionalservice. He is fully conscious that Krsna is the eternal Lord, so noone can disturb him. All his qualifications enable him to dependentirely on the Supreme Lord. Such a standard of devotional service isundoubtedly very rare, but a devotee becomes situated in that stage byfollowing the regulative principles of devotional service. Furthermore,the Lord says that such a devotee is very dear to Him, for the Lord isalways pleased with all his activities in full Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 15
yasman nodvijate loko
lokan nodvijate ca yahharsamarsa-bhayodvegairmukto yah sa ca me priyah
SYNONYMSyasmat--from whom; na--never; udvijate--agitates; lokah--persons;
lokat--persons; na--never; udvijate--disturbed; ca--also; yah--anyone;harsa--happiness; amarsa--distress; bhaya--fear; udvegaih--withanxiety; muktah--freed; yah--who; sah--anyone; ca--also; me--Mine;priyah--very dear.
TRANSLATIONHe for whom no one is put into difficulty and who is not disturbed by
anxiety, who is steady in happiness and distress, is very dear to Me.
PURPORTA few of a devotee's qualifications are further being described. No one
is put into difficulty, anxiety, fearfulness or dissatisfaction by sucha devotee. Since a devotee is kind to everyone, he does not act in sucha way as to put others into anxiety. At the same time, if others try toput a devotee into anxiety, he is not disturbed. It is by the grace ofthe Lord that he is so practiced that he is not disturbed by anyoutward disturbance. Actually because a devotee is always engrossed inKrsna consciousness and engaged in devotional service, all such
material circumstances cannot woo him. Generally a materialistic person
becomes very happy when there is something for his sense gratificationand his body, but when he sees that others have something for theirsense gratification and he hasn't, he is sorry and envious. When he isexpecting some retaliation from an enemy, he is in a state of fear, andwhen he cannot successfully execute something he becomes dejected. Buta devotee is always transcendental to all these disturbances; thereforehe is very dear to Krsna.
TEXT 16
anapeksah sucir daksa
udasino gata-vyathahsarvarambha-parityagiyo mad-bhaktah sa me priyah
SYNONYMSanapeksah--neutral; sucih--pure; daksah--expert; udasinah--free from
care; gata-vyathah--freed from all distress; sarva-arambha--allendeavors; parityagi--renouncer; yah--anyone; mat-bhaktah--My devotee;sah--he; me--Me; priyah--very dear.
TRANSLATIONA devotee who is not dependent on the ordinary course of activities,
who is pure, expert, without cares, free from all pains, and who doesnot strive for some result, is very dear to Me.
PURPORTMoney may be offered to a devotee, but he should not struggle to
acquire it. If automatically by the grace of the Supreme, money comesto him, he is not agitated. Naturally a devotee takes bath at leasttwice in a day and rises early in the morning for devotional service.Thus he is naturally clean both inwardly and outwardly. A devotee isalways expert because he fully knows the essence of all activities oflife and he is convinced of the authoritative scriptures. A devoteenever takes the part of a particular party; therefore he is carefree.He is never pained, because he is free from all designations; he knowsthat his body is a designation, so if there are some bodily pains, heis free. The pure devotee does not endeavor for anything which isagainst the principles of devotional service. For example, constructinga big building requires great energy, and a devotee does not take tosuch business if it does not benefit him by advancing his devotionalservice. He may construct a temple for the Lord, and for that he maytake all kinds of anxiety, but he does not construct a big house forhis personal relations.
TEXT 17
yo na hrsyati na dvesti
na socati na kanksatisubhasubha-parityagibhaktiman yah sa me priyah
SYNONYMS
yah--one who; na--never; hrsyati--takes pleasure; na--never; dvesti--
grieves; na--never; socati--laments; na--never; kanksati--desires;subha--auspicious; asubha--inauspicious; parityagi--renouncer; bhakti-man--devotee; yah--one who; sah--he is; me--Mine; priyah--dear.
TRANSLATIONOne who neither grasps pleasure or grief, who neither laments nor
desires, and who renounces both auspicious and inauspicious things, isvery dear to Me.
PURPORTA pure devotee is neither happy nor distressed over material gain and
loss, nor is he very much anxious to get a son or a disciple, nor is hedistressed by not getting them. If he loses anything which is very dearto him, he does not lament. Similarly, if he does not get that which hedesires, he is not distressed. He is transcendental in the face of allkinds of auspicious, inauspicious and sinful activities. He is preparedto accept all kinds of risks for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord.Nothing is an impediment in the discharge of his devotional service.Such a devotee is very dear to Krsna.
TEXTS 18-19
samah satrau ca mitre ca
tatha manapamanayohsitosna-sukha-duhkhesusamah sanga-vivarjitah
tulya-ninda-stutir mauni
santusto yena kenacitaniketah sthira-matirbhaktiman me priyo narah
SYNONYMSsamah--equal; satrau--to the enemy; ca--also; mitre--to friends; ca--
also; tatha--so; mana--honor; apamanayoh--dishonor; sita--cold; usna--heat; sukha--happiness; duhkhesu--distress; samah--equipoised; sanga-vivarjitah--free from all association; tulya--equal; ninda--defamation;stutih--repute; mauni--silent; santustah--satisfied; yena--somehow;kena--or other; cit--if; aniketah--having no residence; sthira--fixed;matih--determination; bhakti-man--engaged in devotion; me--My; priyah--dear; narah--a man.
TRANSLATIONOne who is equal to friends and enemies, who is equipoised in honor and
dishonor, heat and cold, happiness and distress, fame and infamy, whois always free from contaminated association, always silent andsatisfied with anything, who doesn't care for any residence, who isfixed in knowledge and engaged in devotional service, is very dear toMe.
PURPORT
A devotee is always free from all bad association. Sometimes one is
praised and sometimes one is defamed; that is the nature of humansociety. But a devotee is always transcendental to artificial fame andinfamy, distress or happiness. He is very patient. He does not speak ofanything but the topics about Krsna; therefore he is called silent.Silent does not mean that one should not speak; silent means that oneshould not speak nonsense. One should speak only of essentials, and themost essential speech for the devotee is to speak of the Supreme Lord.He is happy in all conditions; sometimes he may get very palatablefoodstuffs, sometimes not, but he is satisfied. Nor does he care forany residential facility. He may sometimes live underneath a tree, andhe may sometimes live in a very palatial building; he is attracted toneither. He is called fixed because he is fixed in his determinationand knowledge. We may find some repetition in the descriptions of thequalifications of a devotee, but this is just to give an illustrationof the fact that a devotee must acquire all these qualifications.Without good qualifications, one cannot be a pure devotee. Haravabhaktasya kuto mahad-gunah: one who is not a devotee has no goodqualification. One who wants to be recognized as a devotee shoulddevelop the good qualifications. Of course he does not extraneouslyendeavor to acquire these qualifications, but engagement in Krsnaconsciousness and devotional service automatically help him developthem.
TEXT 20
ye tu dharmamrtam idam
yathoktam paryupasatesraddadhana mat-paramabhaktas te 'tiva me priyah
SYNONYMSye--one who; tu--but; dharma--of religion; amrtam--nectar; idam--this;
yatha--as; uktam--said; paryupasate--completely engage; sraddadhanah--with faith; mat-paramah--taking the Supreme Lord as everything;bhaktah--devotees; te--such persons; ativa--very, very; me--Me; priyah--dear.
TRANSLATIONHe who follows this imperishable path of devotional service and who
completely engages himself with faith, making Me the supreme goal, isvery, very dear to Me.
PURPORTIn this chapter the religion of eternal engagement, the explanation of
the processes of transcendental service for approaching the SupremeLord, is given. This process is very dear to the Lord, and He accepts aperson who is engaged in such a process. The question who is better--one who is engaged in the path of impersonal Brahman or one who isengaged in the personal service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead--was raised by Arjuna, and the Lord replied to him so explicitly thatthere is no doubt that devotional service to the Personality of Godheadis the best of all processes of spiritual realization. In other words,in this chapter it is decided that through good association, onedevelops attachment for pure devotional service and thereby accepts a
bona fide spiritual master and from him begins to hear and chant and
observe the regulative principles of devotional service with faith,attachment and devotion and thus becomes engaged in the transcendentalservice of the Lord. This path is recommended in this chapter;therefore there is no doubt that devotional service is the onlyabsolute path for self-realization, for the attainment of the SupremePersonality of Godhead. The impersonal conception of the SupremeAbsolute Truth, as described in this chapter, is recommended only up tothe time one surrenders himself for self-realization. In other words,as long as one does not have the chance to associate with a puredevotee, the impersonal conception may be beneficial. In the impersonalconception of the Absolute Truth one works without fruitive result,meditates and cultivates knowledge to understand spirit and matter.This is necessary as long as one is not in the association of a puredevotee. Fortunately, if one develops directly a desire to engage inKrsna consciousness in pure devotional service, he does not need toundergo step by step improvements in spiritual realization. Devotionalservice, as described in the middle six chapters of the Bhagavad-gita,is more congenial. One need not bother about materials to keep body andsoul together because by the grace of the Lord everything is carriedout automatically.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Twelfth Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Devotional Service.
Chapter 13
Nature, the Enjoyer, and Consciousness
TEXTS 1-2
arjuna uvaca
prakrtim purusam caivaksetram ksetra-jnam eva caetad veditum icchamijnanam jneyam ca kesava
sri-bhagavan uvaca
idam sariram kaunteyaksetram ity abhidhiyateetad yo vetti tam prahuhksetra-jna iti tad-vidah
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; prakrtim--nature; purusam--the enjoyer; ca-
-also; eva--certainly; ksetram--body; ksetra-jnam--knower of the body;eva--certainly; ca--also; etat--all this; veditum--to understand;icchami--I wish; jnanam--knowledge; jneyam--the object of knowledge;ca--also; kesava--O Krsna; sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Personality ofGodhead said; idam--this; sariram--body; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;ksetram--the field; iti--thus; abhidhiyate--is called; etat--this; yah--anyone; vetti--knows; tam--he; prahuh--is called; ksetra-jnah--knowerof the body; iti--thus; tat-vidah--one who knows.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: O my dear Krsna, I wish to know about prakrti [nature],
purusa [the enjoyer], and the field and the knower of the field, and ofknowledge and of the end of knowledge.The Blessed Lord said: This body, O son of Kunti, is called the field,and one who knows this body is called the knower of the field.
PURPORTArjuna was inquisitive about prakrtil, or nature, purusa, the enjoyer,
ksetra, the field, ksetra-jna, its knower, and of knowledge and theobject of knowledge. When he inquired about all these, Krsna said thatthis body is called the field and that one who knows this body iscalled the knower of the field. This body is the field of activity forthe conditioned soul. The conditioned soul is entrapped in materialexistence, and he attempts to lord over material nature. And so,according to his capacity to dominate material nature, he gets a fieldof activity. That field of activity is the body. And what is the body?The body is made of senses. The conditioned soul wants to enjoy sensegratification, and, according to his capacity to enjoy sensegratification, he is offered a body, or field of activity. Thereforethe body is called ksetra, or the field of activity for the conditionedsoul. Now, the person who identifies himself with the body, is calledksetra-jna, the knower of the field. It is not very difficult tounderstand the difference between the field and its knower, the bodyand the knower of the body. Any person can consider that from childhoodto old age he undergoes so many changes of body and yet is still oneperson, remaining. Thus there is a difference between the knower of thefield of activities and the actual field of activities. A livingconditioned soul can thus understand that he is different from thebody. It is described in the beginning--dehino 'smin--that the livingentity is within the body and that the body is changing from childhoodto boyhood and from boyhood to youth and from youth to old age, and theperson who owns the body knows that the body is changing. The owner isdistinctly ksetra-jna. Sometimes we understand that, "I am happy," "Iam a man," "I am a woman," "I am a dog," "I am a cat." These are thebodily designations of the knower. But the knower is different from thefield. Although we use many articles--our clothes, etc.--we know thatwe are different from the things used. Similarly, we also understand bya little contemplation that we are different from the body.In the first six chapters of Bhagavad-gita the knower of the body, theliving entity, and the position by which he can understand the SupremeLord are described. In the middle six chapters of the Gita, the SupremePersonality of Godhead and the relationship between the individual souland the Supersoul in regard to devotional service are described. Thesuperior position of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and thesubordinate position of the individual soul are definitely defined inthese chapters. The living entities are subordinate under allcircumstances, but in their forgetfulness they are suffering. Whenenlightened by pious activities, they approach the Supreme Lord indifferent capacities--as the distressed, those in want of money, theinquisitive, and those in search of knowledge. That is also described.Now, starting with the Thirteenth Chapter, how the living entity comesin contact with material nature, how he is delivered by the SupremeLord through the different methods of fruitive activities, cultivationof knowledge, and the discharge of devotional service are explained.Although the living entity is completely different from the materialbody, he somehow becomes related. This also is explained.
TEXT 3
ksetra-jnam capi mam viddhi
sarva-ksetresu bharataksetra-ksetrajnayor jnanamyat taj jnanam matam mama
SYNONYMSksetra-jnam--the knower; ca--also; api--certainly; mam--Me; viddhi--
know; sarva--all; ksetresu--in bodily fields; bharata--O son ofBharata; ksetra--field of activities (the body); ksetra-jnayoh--theknower of the field; jnanam--knowledge; yat--that which is taught; tat--that; jnanam--knowledge; matam--opinion; mama--that.
TRANSLATIONO scion of Bharata, you should understand that I am also the knower in
all bodies, and to understand this body and its knower is calledknowledge. That is My opinion.
PURPORTWhile discussing the subject of this body and the knower of the body,
the soul and the Supersoul, we shall find three different topics ofstudy: the Lord, the living entity, and matter. In every field ofactivities, in every body, there are two souls: the individual soul andthe Supersoul. Because the Supersoul is the plenary expansion of theSupreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, Krsna says, "I am also theknower, but I am not the individual knower of the body. I am thesuperknower. I am present in every body as the Paramatma, orSupersoul."One who studies the subject matter of the field of activity and theknower of the field very minutely, in terms of this Bhagavad-gita, canattain to knowledge.The Lord says, "I am the knower of the field of activities in everyindividual body." The individual may be the knower of his own body, buthe is not in knowledge of other bodies. The Supreme Personality ofGodhead, who is present as the Supersoul in all bodies, knowseverything about all bodies. He knows all the different bodies of allthe various species of life. A citizen may know everything about hispatch of land, but the king knows not only his palace but also all theproperties possessed by the individual citizens. Similarly, one may bethe proprietor of the body individually, but the Supreme Lord is theproprietor of all bodies. The king is the original proprietor of thekingdom, and the citizen is the secondary proprietor. Similarly, theSupreme Lord is the supreme proprietor of all bodies.The body consists of the senses. The Supreme Lord is Hrsikesa, Whichmeans "the controller of the senses." He is the original controller ofthe senses, just as the king is the original controller of all theactivities of the state; the citizens are secondary controllers. TheLord says, "I am also the knower." This means that He is thesuperknower; the individual soul knows only his particular body. In theVedic literature, it is stated as follows:
ksetrani hi sarirani
bijam capi subhasubhetani vetti sa yogatma
tatah ksetra-jna ucyate
This body is called the ksetra, and within it dwells the owner of the
body and the Supreme Lord who knows both the body and the owner of thebody. Therefore He is called the knower of all fields. The distinctionbetween the field of activities, the knower of activities, and thesupreme knower of activities is described as follows. Perfect knowledgeof the constitution of the body, the constitution of the individualsoul, and the constitution of the Supersoul is known in terms of Vedicliterature as jnana. That is the opinion of Krsna. To understand boththe soul and the Supersoul as one yet distinct is knowledge. One whodoes not understand the field of activity and the knower of activity isnot in perfect knowledge. One has to understand the position ofprakrti, nature, purusa, the enjoyer of the nature, and isvara, theknower who dominates or controls nature and the individual soul. Oneshould not confuse the three in their different capacities. One shouldnot confuse the painter, the painting and the easel. This materialworld, which is the field of activities, is nature, and the enjoyer ofnature is the living entity, and above them both is the supremecontroller, the Personality of Godhead. It is stated in the Vediclanguage (in the Svetasvatara Upanisad 1.12), bhokta bhogyam preritaramca matva. sarvam proktam tri vidham-brahmam etat. There are threeBrahman conceptions: prakrti is Brahman as the field of activities, andthe jiva (individual soul) is also Brahman and is trying to controlmaterial nature, and the controller of both of them is also Brahman,but He is the factual controller.In this chapter it will be also explained that out of the two knowers,one is fallible and the other is infallible. One is superior and theother is subordinate. One who understands the two knowers of the fieldto be one and the same contradicts the Supreme Personality of Godhead,who states here very clearly, "I am also the knower of the field ofactivity." One who misunderstands a rope to be a serpent is not inknowledge. There are different kinds of bodies, and there are differentowners of the bodies. Because each individual soul has his individualcapacity for lording it over material nature, there are differentbodies. But the Supreme also is present in them as the controller. Theword ca is significant for it indicates the total number of bodies.That is the opinion of Srila Baladeva Vidyabhusana: Krsna is theSupersoul present in each and every body apart from the individualsoul. And Krsna explicitly says here that the Supersoul is thecontroller of both the field of activities and the finite enjoyer.
TEXT 4
tat ksetram yac ca yadrk ca
yad-vikari yatas ca yatsa ca yo yat-prabhavas catat samasena me srnu
SYNONYMStat--that; ksetram--field of activities; yat--as; ca--also; yadrk--as
it is; ca--also; yat--what is; vikari--changes; yatah--from which; ca--also; yat--which; sah--he; ca--also; yah--one; yat--which; prabhavahca--influence also; tat--that; samasena--in summary; me--from Me; srnu--understand.
TRANSLATION
Now please hear My brief description of this field of activity and how
it is constituted, what its changes are, whence it is produced, whothat knower of the field of activities is, and what his influences are.
PURPORTThe Lord is describing the field of activities and the knower of the
field of activities in their constitutional positions. One has to knowhow this body is constituted, the materials of which this body is made,under whose control this body is working, how the changes are takingplace, wherefrom the changes are coming, what the causes are, what thereasons are, what the ultimate goal of the individual soul is, and whatthe actual form of the individual soul is. One should also know thedistinction between the individual living soul and the Supersoul, theirdifferent influences, their potentials, etc. One just has to understandthis Bhagavad-gita directly from the description given by the SupremePersonality of Godhead, and all this will be clarified. But one shouldbe careful not to consider the Supreme Personality of Godhead in everybody and individual soul to be the jiva. This is something likeequalizing the potent and the impotent.
TEXT 5
rsibhir bahudha gitam
chandobhir vividhaih prthakbrahma-sutra-padais caivahetumadbhir viniscitaih
SYNONYMSrsibhih--by the wise sages; bahudha--in many ways; gitam--described;
chandobhih--Vedic hymns; vividhaih--in various; prthak--variously;brahma-sutra--the Vedanta; padaih--aphorisms; ca--also; eva--certainly;hetu-madbhih--with cause and effect; viniscitaih--ascertain.
TRANSLATIONThat knowledge of the field of activities and of the knower of
activities is described by various sages in various Vedic writings--especially in the Vedanta-sutra--and is presented with all reasoning asto cause and effect.
PURPORTThe Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is the highest authority in
explaining this knowledge. Still, as a matter of course, learnedscholars and standard authorities always give evidence from previousauthorities. Krsna is explaining this most controversial pointregarding the duality and nonduality of the soul and the Supersoul byreferring to the scriptures, the Vedanta, which are accepted asauthority. First, He says, "This is according to different sages." Asfar as the sages are concerned, besides Himself, Vyasadeva, the authorof the Vedanta-sutra, is a great sage, and in the Vedanta-sutra dualityis perfectly explained. And Vyasadeva's father, Parasara, was also agreat sage, and he writes in his books of religiosity: aham tvam catathanye... "we--you, I and the various other living entities--are alltranscendental, although in material bodies. Now we are fallen into the
ways of the three modes of material nature according to our different
karma. As such, some are on higher levels, and some are in the lowernature. The higher and lower natures exist due to ignorance and arebeing manifested in an infinite number of living entities. But theSupersoul, which is infallible, is uncontaminated by the threequalities of nature and is transcendental." Similarly, in the originalVedas, a distinction between the soul, the Supersoul and the body ismade, especially in the Katha Upanisad.There is a manifestation of the Supreme Lord's energy known as anna-maya, by which one depends simply upon food for existence. This is amaterialistic realization of the Supreme. Then there is prana-maya;this means that after realizing the Supreme Absolute Truth infoodstuff, one can realize the Absolute Truth in the living symptoms,or life forms. In jnana-maya the living symptom develops to the pointof thinking, feeling and willing. Then there is Brahman realization andrealization called vijnana-maya by which the living entity's mind andlife symptoms are distinguished from the living entity himself. Thenext and supreme stage is ananda-maya, realization of the all-blissfulnature. Thus there are five stages of Brahman realization, which arecalled brahma puccham. Out of these the first three--anna-maya, prana-maya and jnana-maya--involve the fields of activities of the livingentities. Transcendental to all these fields of activities is theSupreme Lord, who is called ananda-maya. In the Vedanta-sutra also theSupreme is called, ananda-mayo 'bhyasat: the Supreme Personality ofGodhead is by nature full of joy, and to enjoy His transcendentalbliss, He expands into vijnana-maya, prana-maya, jnana-maya, and anna-maya. In this field of activities the living entity is considered to bethe enjoyer, and different from him is the ananda-maya. That means thatif the living entity decides to enjoy, in dovetailing himself with theananda-maya, then he becomes perfect. This is the real picture of theSupreme Lord, as the supreme knower of the field, the living entity asthe subordinate knower, and the nature of the field of activities.
TEXTS 6-7
maha-bhutany ahankaro
buddhir avyaktam eva caindriyani dasaikam capanca cendriya-gocarah
iccha dvesah sukham duhkham
sanghatas cetana dhrtihetat ksetram samasenasa-vikaram udahrtam
SYNONYMSmaha-bhutani--great elements; ahankarah--false ego; buddhih--
intelligence; avyaktam--the unmanifested; eva--certainly; ca--also;indriyani--senses; dasa-ekam--eleven; ca--also; panca--five; ca--also;indriya-go-carah--objects of the senses; iccha--desire; dvesah--hatred;sukham--happiness; duhkham--distress; sanghatah--the aggregate; cetana--living symptoms; dhrtih--conviction; etat--all this; ksetram--thefield of activities; samasena--in summary; sa-vikaram--interaction;udahrtam--exemplified.
TRANSLATION
The five great elements, false ego, intelligence, the unmanifested, the
ten senses, the mind, the five sense objects, desire, hatred,happiness, distress, the aggregate, the life symptoms, and convictions--all these are considered, in summary, to be the field of activitiesand its interactions.
PURPORTFrom all the authoritative statements of the great sages, the Vedic
hymns and the aphorisms of the Vedanta-sutra, the components of thisworld are earth, water, fire, air and ether. These are the five greatelements (maha-bhuta). Then there are false ego, intelligence and theunmanifested stage of the three modes of nature. Then there are fivesenses for acquiring knowledge: the eyes, ears, nose, tongue and touch.Then five working senses: voice, legs, hands, anus and genitals. Then,above the senses, there is the mind, which is within and which can becalled the sense within. Therefore, including the mind, there areeleven senses altogether. Then there are the five objects of thesenses: smell, taste, form, touch and sound. Now the aggregate of thesetwenty-four elements is called the field of activity. If one makes ananalytical study of these twenty-four subjects, then he can very wellunderstand the field of activity. Then there is desire, hatred,pleasure and pain, which are interactions, representations of the fivegreat elements in the gross body. The living symptoms, represented byconsciousness and conviction, are the manifestation of the subtle body--the mind, ego and intelligence. These subtle elements are includedwithin the field of activities.The five great elements are a gross representation of the subtle falseego. They are a representation in the material conception.Consciousness is represented by intelligence, of which the unmanifestedstage is the three modes of material nature. The unmanifested threemodes of material nature is called pradhana.One who desires to know the twenty-four elements in detail along withtheir interactions should study the philosophy in more detail. InBhagavad-gita, a summary only is given.The body is the representation of all these factors, and there arechanges of the body, which are six in number: the body is born, itgrows, it stays, it produces by-products, then it begins to decay, andat the last stage it vanishes. Therefore the field is a nonpermanentmaterial thing. However, the ksetra-jna, the knower of the field, itsproprietor, is different.
TEXTS 8-12
amanitvam adambhitvam
ahimsa ksantir arjavamacaryopasanam saucamsthairyam atma-vinigrahah
indriyarthesu vairagyam
anahankara eva cajanma-mrtyu-jara-vyadhi-duhkha-dosanudarsanam
asaktir anabhisvangah
putra-dara-grhadisunityam ca sama-cittatvamistanistopapattisu
mayi cananya-yogena
bhaktir avyabhicarinivivikta-desa-sevitvamaratir jana-samsadi
adhyatma-jnana-nityatvam
tattva-jnanartha-darsanametaj jnanam iti proktamajnanam yad ato 'nyatha
SYNONYMSamanitvam--humility; adambhitvam--pridelessness; ahimsa--nonviolence;
ksantih--tolerance; arjavam--simplicity; acarya-upasanam--approaching abona fide spiritual master; saucam--cleanliness; sthairyam--steadfastness; atma-vinigrahah--control; indriya-arthesu--in the matterof the senses; vairagyam--renunciation; anahankarah--being withoutfalse egoism; eva--certainly; ca--also; janma--birth; mrtyu--death;jara--old age; vyadhi--disease; duhkha--distress; dosa--fault;anudarsanam--observing; asaktih--without attachment; anabhisvangah--without association; putra--sons; dara--wife; grha-adisu--home, etc.;nityam--eternal; ca--also; sama-cittatvam--equilibrium; ista--desirable; anista--undesirable; upapattisu--having obtained; mayi--untoMe; ca--also; ananya-yogena--by devotional service; bhaktih--devotion;avyabhicarini--constant, unalloyed; vivikta--solitary; desa--place;sevitvam--aspiring; aratih--without attachment; jana--to people ingeneral; samsadi--mass; adhyatma--pertaining to the self; jnana--knowledge; nityatvam--eternity; tattva-jnana--knowledge of the truth;artha--the object; darsanam--philosophy; etat--all this; jnanam--knowledge; iti--thus; proktam--declared; ajnanam--ignorance; yat--thatwhich; atah--from this; anyatha--others.
TRANSLATIONHumility, pridelessness, nonviolence, tolerance, simplicity,
approaching a bona fide spiritual master, cleanliness, steadiness andself-control; renunciation of the objects of sense gratification;absence of false ego, the perception of the evil of birth, death, oldage and disease; nonattachment to children, wife, home and the rest andeven-mindedness amid pleasant and unpleasant events; constant andunalloyed devotion to Me, resorting to solitary places, detachment fromthe general mass of people; accepting the importance of self-realization, and philosophical search for the Absolute Truth--all theseI thus declare to be knowledge and what is contrary to these isignorance.
PURPORTThis process of knowledge is sometimes misunderstood by less
intelligent men as being the interaction of the field of activity. Butactually this is the real process of knowledge. If one accepts thisprocess, then the possibility of approaching the Absolute Truth exists.This is not the interaction of the twenty-four elements, as describedbefore. This is actually the means to get out of it. Of all thedescriptions of the process of knowledge, the most important point isdescribed in the first line of the eleventh verse. Mayi cananya-yogenabhaktir avyabhicarini: the process of knowledge terminates in unalloyed
devotional service to the Lord. So, if one does not approach, or is not
able to approach, the transcendental service of the Lord, then theother nineteen items are of no particular value. But, if one takes todevotional service in full Krsna consciousness, the other nineteenitems automatically develop within him. The principle of accepting aspiritual master, as mentioned in the eighth verse, is essential. Evenfor one who takes to devotional service, it is most important.Transcendental life begins when one accepts a bona fide spiritualmaster. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, clearly stateshere that this process of knowledge is the actual path. Anythingspeculated beyond this is nonsense.As for the knowledge outlined here, the items may be analyzed asfollows: Humility means that one should not be anxious to have thesatisfaction of being honored by others. The material conception oflife makes us very eager to receive honor from others, but from thepoint of view of a man in perfect knowledge--who knows that he is notthis body--anything, honor or dishonor, pertaining to this body isuseless. One should not be hankering after this material deception.People are very anxious to be famous for their religion, andconsequently sometimes it is found that without understanding theprinciples of religion, one enters into some group, which is notactually following religious principles, and then wants to advertisehimself as a religious mentor. As for actual advancement in spiritualscience, one should have a test to see how far he is progressing. Hecan judge by these items.Nonviolence is generally taken to mean not killing or destroying thebody, but actually nonviolence means not to put others into distress.People in general are trapped by ignorance in the material concept oflife, and they perpetually suffer material pains. So, unless oneelevates people to spiritual knowledge, one is practicing violence. Oneshould try his best to distribute real knowledge to the people, so thatthey may become enlightened and leave this material entanglement. Thatis nonviolence.Tolerance means that one should be practiced to bear insult anddishonor from others. If one is engaged in the advancement of spiritualknowledge, there will be so many insults and so much dishonor fromothers. This is expected because material nature is so constituted.Even a boy like Prahlada, who, only five years old, was engaged in thecultivation of spiritual knowledge, was endangered when his fatherbecame antagonistic to his devotion. The father tried to kill him in somany ways, but Prahlada tolerated him. So, for making advancement inspiritual knowledge, there may be many impediments, but we should betolerant and continue our progress with determination.Simplicity means that without diplomacy one should be so straight-forward that he can disclose the real truth even to an enemy. As foracceptance of the spiritual master, that is essential, because withoutthe instruction of a bona fide spiritual master, one cannot progress inthe spiritual science. One should approach the spiritual master withall humility and offer him all services so that he will be pleased tobestow his blessings upon the disciple. Because a bona fide spiritualmaster is a representative of Krsna, if he bestows any blessings uponhis disciple, that will make the disciple immediately advanced withoutthe disciple's following the regulative principles. Or, the regulativeprinciples will be easier for one who has served the spiritual masterwithout reservation.Cleanliness is essential for making advancement in spiritual life.There are two kinds of cleanliness: external and internal. Externalcleanliness means taking a bath, but for internal cleanliness, one has
to think of Krsna always and chant Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna,
Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. This processcleans the accumulated dust of past karma from the mind.Steadiness means that one should be very determined to make progress inspiritual life. Without such determination, one cannot make tangibleprogress. And self-control means that one should not accept anythingwhich is detrimental to the path of spiritual progress. One shouldbecome accustomed to this and reject anything which is against the pathof spiritual progress. This is real renunciation. The senses are sostrong that they are always anxious to have sense gratification. Oneshould not cater to these demands, which are not necessary. The sensesshould only be gratified to keep the body fit so that one can dischargehis duty in advancing in spiritual life. The most important anduncontrollable sense is the tongue. If one can control the tongue, thenthere is every possibility of controlling the other senses. Thefunction of the tongue is to taste and to vibrate. Therefore, bysystematic regulation, the tongue should always be engaged in tastingthe remnants of foodstuffs offered to Krsna and chanting Hare Krsna. Asfar as the eyes are concerned, they should not be allowed to seeanything but the beautiful form of Krsna. That will control the eyes.Similarly, the ears should be engaged in hearing about Krsna and thenose in smelling the flowers offered to Krsna. This is the process ofdevotional service, and it is understood here that Bhagavad-gita issimply expounding the science of devotional service. Devotional serviceis the main and sole objective. Unintelligent commentators on theBhagavad-gita try to divert the mind of the reader to other subjects,but there is no other subject in Bhagavad-gita than devotional service.False ego means accepting this body as oneself. When one understandsthat he is not his body and is spirit soul, that is real ego. Ego isthere. False ego is condemned, but not real ego. In the Vedicliterature (Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 1.4.10) it is said, aham brahmasmi:I am Brahman, I am spirit. This "I am," the sense of self, also existsin the liberated stage of self-realization. This sense of "I am" isego, but when the sense of "I am" is applied to this false body it isfalse ego. When the sense of self is applied to reality, that is realego. There are some philosophers who say we should give up our ego, butwe cannot give up our ego, because ego means identity. We ought, ofcourse, to give up the false identification with the body.One should try to understand the distress of accepting birth, death,old age and disease. There are descriptions in various Vedicliteratures of birth. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam the world of the unborn,the child's stay in the womb of the mother, its suffering, etc., areall very graphically described. It should be thoroughly understood thatbirth is distressful. Because we forget how much distress we havesuffered within the womb of the mother, we do not make any solution tothe repetition of birth and death. Similarly at the time of death thereare all kinds of sufferings, and they are also mentioned in theauthoritative scriptures. These should be discussed. And as far asdisease and old age are concerned, everyone gets practical experience.No one wants to be diseased, and no one wants to become old, but thereis no avoiding these. Unless we have a pessimistic view of thismaterial life, considering the distresses of birth, death, old age anddisease, there is no impetus for our making advancement in spirituallife.As for detachment from children, wife and home, it is not meant thatone should have no feeling for these. They are natural objects ofaffection. But when they are not favorable to spiritual progress, thenone should not be attached to them. The best process for making the
home pleasant is Krsna consciousness. If one is in full Krsna
consciousness, he can make his home very happy, because this process ofKrsna consciousness is very easy. One need only chant Hare Krsna, HareKrsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, HareHare, accept the remnants of foodstuffs offered to Krsna, have somediscussion on books like Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam, andengage oneself in Deity worship. These four will make one happy. Oneshould train the members of his family in this way. The family memberscan sit down morning and evening and chant together Hare Krsna, HareKrsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, HareHare. If one can mold his family life in this way to develop Krsnaconsciousness, following these four principles, then there is no needto change from family life to renounced life. But if it is notcongenial, not favorable for spiritual advancement, then family lifeshould be abandoned. One must sacrifice everything to realize or serveKrsna, just as Arjuna did. Arjuna did not want to kill his familymembers, but when he understood that these family members wereimpediments to his Krsna realization, he accepted the instruction ofKrsna and fought and killed them. In all cases, one should be detachedfrom the happiness and distress of family life, because in this worldone can never be fully happy or fully miserable.Happiness and distress are concomitant factors of material life. Oneshould learn to tolerate, as advised in Bhagavad-gita. One can neverrestrict the coming and going of happiness and distress, so one shouldbe detached from the materialistic way of life and be automaticallyequipoised in both cases. Generally, when we get something desirable,we are very happy, and when we get something undesirable, we aredistressed. But if we are actually in the spiritual position, thesethings will not agitate us. To reach that stage, we have to practiceunbreakable devotional service; Devotional service to Krsna withoutdeviation means engaging oneself in the nine processes of devotionalservice, chanting, hearing, worshiping, offering respect, etc., asdescribed in the last verse of the Ninth Chapter. That process shouldbe followed.Naturally, when one is adapted to the spiritual way of life, he willnot want to mix with materialistic men. That would go against hisgrain. One may test himself by seeing how far he is inclined to live ina solitary place without unwanted association. Naturally a devotee hasno taste for unnecessary sporting or cinema-going or enjoying somesocial function, because he understands that these are simply a wasteof time. There are many research scholars and philosophers who studysex life or some other subject, but according to Bhagavad-gita, suchresearch work and philosophical speculation have no value. That is moreor less nonsensical. According to Bhagavad-gita, one should makeresearch, by philosophical discretion into the nature of the soul. Oneshould make research to understand with what the self is concerned.That is recommended here.As far as self-realization is concerned, it is clearly stated here thatbhakti-yoga is especially practical. As soon as there is a question ofdevotion, one must consider the relationship between the Supersoul andthe individual soul. The individual soul and the Supersoul cannot beone, at least not in the bhakti conception, the devotional conceptionof life. This service of the individual soul to the Supreme Soul iseternal, nityam, as it is clearly stated. So bhakti or devotionalservice is eternal. One should be established in that philosophicalconviction, otherwise it is only a waste of time, ignorance.In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.11) this is explained; vadanti tattattva-vidas tattvam yaj jnanam advayam. "Those who are actually
knowers of the Absolute Truth know that the Self is realized in three
different phases, as Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan." Bhagavan is thelast word in the realization of the Absolute Truth; therefore oneshould reach up to that platform of understanding the SupremePersonality of Godhead and thus engage in the devotional service of theLord. That is perfection of knowledge.Beginning from practicing humility up to the point of realization ofthe Supreme Truth, the Absolute Personality of Godhead, this process isjust like a staircase beginning from the ground floor up to the topfloor. Now on this staircase there are so many people who have reachedthe first floor, or the second or the third floor, etc., but unless onereaches the top floor, which is the understanding of Krsna, he is at alower stage of knowledge. If anyone wants to compete with God and atthe same time make advancement in spiritual knowledge, he will befrustrated. It is clearly stated that without humility understanding isharmful. To think oneself God is most puffed up. Although the livingentity is always being kicked by the stringent laws of material nature,still he thinks, "I am God" because of ignorance. One should be humbleand know that he is subordinate to the Supreme Lord. Due to rebellionagainst the Supreme Lord, one becomes subordinate to material nature.One must know and be convinced of this truth.
TEXT 13
jneyam yat tat pravaksyami
yaj jnatvamrtam asnuteanadi mat-param brahmana sat tan nasad ucyate
SYNONYMSjneyam--knowable; yat--that; tat--which; pravaksyami--I shall now
explain; yat--which; jnatva--knowing; amrtam--nectar; asnute--taste;anadi--beginningless; mat-param--subordinate to Me; brahma--spirit; na--neither; sat--cause; tat--that; na--nor; asat--effect; ucyate--iscalled.
TRANSLATIONI shall now explain the knowable, knowing which you will taste the
eternal. This is beginningless, and it is subordinate to Me. It iscalled Brahman, the spirit, and it lies beyond the cause and effect ofthis material world.
PURPORTThe Lord has explained the field of activities and the knower of the
field. He has also explained the process of knowing the knower of thefield of activities. Now He is explaining the knowable, both the souland the Supersoul respectively. By knowledge of the knower, both thesoul and the Supersoul, one can relish the nectar of life. As explainedin the Second Chapter, the living entity is eternal. This is alsoconfirmed here. There is no specific date at which the jiva was born.Nor can anyone trace out the history of the jivatma's manifestationfrom the Supreme Lord. Therefore it is beginningless. The Vedicliterature confirms this: na jayate mriyate va vipascit (Katha Upanisad1.2.18). The knower of the body is never born and never dies, and he isfull of knowledge.
The Supreme Lord is also stated in the Vedic literature (Svetasvatara
Upanisad 6.16) as pradhana-ksetrajna-patir gunesah. The Supreme Lord asthe Supersoul is the chief knower of the body and He is the master ofthe three modes of material nature. In the smrti it is said: dasa-bhutoharer eva nanyasvaiva kadacana. The living entities are eternally inthe service of the Supreme Lord. This is also confirmed by LordCaitanya in His teachings; therefore the description of Brahmanmentioned in this verse is in relation to the individual soul, and whenthe word Brahman is applied to the living entity, it is to beunderstood that he is vijnana-brahma as opposed to ananda-brahma.Ananda-brahma is the Supreme Brahman Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 14
sarvatah pani-padam tat
sarvato 'ksi-siro-mukhamsarvatah srutimal lokesarvam avrtya tisthati
SYNONYMSsarvatah--everywhere; pani--hands; padam--legs; tat--that; sarvatah--
everywhere; aksi--eyes; sirah--head; mukham--face; sarvatah--everywhere; sruti-mat--hearing; loke--in the world; sarvam--everything;avrtya--covering; tisthati--exists.
TRANSLATIONEverywhere are His hands and legs, His eyes and faces, and He hears
everything. In this way the Supersoul exists.
PURPORTAs the sun exists diffusing its unlimited rays, so does the Supersoul,
or Supreme Personality of Godhead. He exists in His all-pervading form,and in Him exist all the individual living entities, beginning from thefirst great teacher, Brahma, down to the small ants. There areunlimited heads, legs, hands and eyes, and unlimited living entities.All are existing in and on the Supersoul. Therefore the Supersoul isall-pervading. The individual soul, however, cannot say that he has hishands, legs and eyes everywhere. That is not possible. If he thinksthat although under ignorance he is not conscious that his hands andlegs are diffused all over, but when he attains to proper knowledge hewill come to that stage, his thinking is contradictory. This means thatthe individual soul, having become conditioned by material nature, isnot supreme. The Supreme is different from the individual soul. TheSupreme Lord can extend His hand without limit; the individual soulcannot. In Bhagavad-gita the Lord says that if anyone offers Him aflower, or a fruit, or a little water, He accepts. If the Lord is a fardistance away, how can He accept things? This is the omnipotence of theLord: even though He is situated in His own abode, far, far away fromearth, He can extend His hand to accept what anyone offers. That is Hispotency. In the Brahma-samhita (5.37) it is stated, goloka evanivasaty: although He is always engaged in pastimes in Histranscendental planet, He is all-pervading. The individual soul cannotclaim that he is all-pervading. Therefore this verse describes theSupreme Soul, the Personality of Godhead, not the individual soul.
TEXT 15
sarvendriya-gunabhasam
sarvendriya-vivarjitamasaktam sarva-bhrc caivanirgunam guna-bhoktr ca
SYNONYMSsarva--all; indriya--senses; guna--qualities; abhasam--original source;
sarva--all; indriya--senses; vivarjitam--being without; asaktam--without attachment; sarva-bhrt--maintainer of everyone; ca--also; eva--certainly; nirgunam--without material qualities; guna-bhoktr--simultaneously master of the gunas; ca--also.
TRANSLATIONThe Supersoul is the original source of all senses, yet He is without
senses. He is unattached, although He is the maintainer of all livingbeings. He transcends the modes of nature, and at the same time He isthe master of all modes of material nature.
PURPORTThe Supreme Lord, although the source of all the senses of the living
entities, doesn't have material senses like they have. Actually, theindividual souls have spiritual senses, but in conditioned life theyare covered with the material elements, and therefore the senseactivities are exhibited through matter. The Supreme Lord's senses arenot so covered. His senses are transcendental and are therefore callednirguna. Guna means the material modes, but His senses are withoutmaterial covering. It should be understood that His senses are notexactly like ours. Although He is the source of all our sensualactivities, He has His transcendental senses which are uncontaminated.This is very nicely explained in the Svetasvatara Upanisad (3.19) inthe verse apani-pado javano grahita. The Supreme Personality of Godheadhas no hands which are materially contaminated, but He has His handsand accepts whatever sacrifice is offered to Him. That is thedistinction between the conditioned soul and the Supersoul. He has nomaterial eyes, but He has eyes--otherwise how could He see? He seeseverything, past, present and future. He lives within the heart of theliving being, and He knows what we have done in the past, what we aredoing now, and what is awaiting us in the future. This is alsoconfirmed in Bhagavad-gita: He knows everything, but no one knows Him.It is said that the Supreme Lord has no legs like us, but He can travelthroughout space because He has spiritual legs. In other words, theLord is not impersonal; He has His eyes, legs, hands and everythingelse, and because we are part and parcel of the Supreme Lord we alsohave these things. But His hands, legs, eyes and senses are notcontaminated by material nature.Bhagavad-gita also confirms that when the Lord appears He appears as Heis by His internal potency. He is not contaminated by the materialenergy because He is the Lord of material energy. In the Vedicliterature we find that His whole embodiment is spiritual. He has Hiseternal form called sac-cid-ananda-vigraha. He is full of all opulence.He is the proprietor of all wealth and the owner of all energy. He isthe most intelligent and is full of knowledge. These are some of thesymptoms of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is maintainer of all
living entities and the witness of all activity. As far as we can
understand from Vedic literature, the Supreme Lord is alwaystranscendental. Although we do not see His head, face, hands, or legs,He has them, and when we are elevated to the transcendental situationthen we can see the Lord's form. Due to materially contaminated senses,we cannot see His form. Therefore the impersonalists who are stillmaterially affected cannot understand the Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 16
bahir antas ca bhutanam
acaram caram eva casuksmatvat tad avijneyamdura-stham cantike ca tat
SYNONYMSbahih--outside; antah--inside; ca--also; bhutanam--of all living
entities; acaram--not moving; caram--moving; eva--also; ca--and;suksmatvat--on account of being subtle; tat--that; avijneyam--unknowable; dura-stham--far away; ca--also; antike--near; ca--and; tat--that.
TRANSLATIONThe Supreme Truth exists both internally and externally, in the moving
and nonmoving. He is beyond the power of the material senses to see orto know. Although far, far away, He is also near to all.
PURPORTIn Vedic literature we understand that Narayana, the Supreme Person, is
residing both outside and inside of every living entity. He is presentin both the spiritual and material worlds. Although He is far, faraway, still He is near to us. These are the statements of Vedicliterature. Asino duram vrajati sayano yati sarvatah (Katha Upanisad1.2.21). And because He is always engaged in transcendental bliss, wecannot understand how He is enjoying His full opulence. We cannot seeor understand with these material senses. Therefore in the Vediclanguage it is said that to understand Him our material mind and sensescannot act. But one who has purified his mind and senses by practicingKrsna consciousness in devotional service can see Him constantly. It isconfirmed in Brahma-samhita that the devotee who has developed love forthe Supreme God can see Him always, without cessation. And it isconfirmed in Bhagavad-gita (11.54) that He can be seen and understoodonly by devotional service. Bhaktya tv ananyaya sakyah.
TEXT 17
avibhaktam ca bhutesu
vibhaktam iva ca sthitambhuta-bhartr ca taj jneyamgrasisnu prabhavisnu ca
SYNONYMSavibhaktam--without division; ca--also; bhutesu--in every living being;
vibhaktam--divided; iva--as if; ca--also; sthitam--situated; bhuta-
bhartr--maintainer of all living entities; ca--also; tat--that; jneyam-
-to be understood; grasisnu--devours; prabhavisnu--develops; ca--also.
TRANSLATIONAlthough the Supersoul appears to be divided, He is never divided. He
is situated as one. Although He is the maintainer of every livingentity, it is to be understood that He devours and develops all.
PURPORTThe Lord is situated in everyone's heart as the Supersoul. Does this
mean that He has become divided? No. Actually, He is one. The exampleis given of the sun: The sun, at the meridian, is situated in itsplace. But if one goes for five thousand miles in all directions andasks, "Where is the sun?" everyone will say that it is shining on hishead. In the Vedic literature this example is given to show thatalthough He is undivided, He is situated as if divided. Also it is saidin Vedic literature that one Visnu is present everywhere by Hisomnipotence, just as the sun appears in many places to many persons.And the Supreme Lord, although the maintainer of every living entity,devours everything at the time of annihilation. This was confirmed inthe Eleventh Chapter when the Lord said that He had come to devour allthe warriors assembled at Kuruksetra. He also mentioned that in theform of time He devours also. He is the annihilator, the killer of all.When there is creation, He develops all from their original state, andat the time of annihilation He devours them. The Vedic hymns confirmthe fact that He is the origin of all living entities and the rest ofall. After creation, everything rests in His omnipotence, and afterannihilation everything again returns to rest in Him. These are theconfirmations of Vedic hymns. Yato va imani bhutani jayante yena jatanijivanti yat prayanty abhisam-visanti tad brahma tad vijijnasasva(Taittiriya Upanisad 3.1).
TEXT 18
jyotisam api taj jyotis
tamasah param ucyatejnanam jneyam jnana-gamyamhrdi sarvasya visthitam
SYNONYMSjyotisam--in all luminous objects; api--also; tat--that; jyotih--source
of light; tamasah--of the darkness; param--beyond; ucyate--is said;jnanam--knowledge; jneyam--to be known; jnana-gamyam--to be approachedby knowledge; hrdi--in the heart; sarvasya--of everyone; visthitam--situated.
TRANSLATIONHe is the source of light in all luminous objects. He is beyond the
darkness of matter and is unmanifested. He is knowledge, He is theobject of knowledge, and He is the goal of knowledge. He is situated ineveryone's heart.
PURPORT
The Supersoul, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the source of
light in all luminous objects like the sun, moon and stars. In theVedic literature we find that in the spiritual kingdom there is no needof sun or moon because the effulgence of the Supreme Lord is there. Inthe material world that brahmajyoti, the Lord's spiritual effulgence,is covered by mahat-tattva, the material elements; therefore in thismaterial world we require the assistance of sun, moon, electricity,etc., for light. But in the spiritual world there is no need of suchthings. It is clearly stated in the Vedic literature that because ofHis luminous effulgence, everything is illuminated. It is clear,therefore, that His situation is not in the material world. He issituated in the spiritual world, which is far, far away in thespiritual sky. That is also confirmed in the Vedic literature. Aditya-varnam tamasah parastat (Svetasvatara Upanisad 3.8). He is just likethe sun, eternally luminous, but He is far, far beyond the darkness ofthis material world. His knowledge is transcendental. The Vedicliterature confirms that Brahman is concentrated transcendentalknowledge. To one who is anxious to be transferred to that spiritualworld, knowledge is given by the Supreme Lord who is situated ineveryone's heart.One Vedic mantra (Svetasvatara Upanisad 6.18) says, tam ha devam atma-buddhi-prakasam mumuksur vai saranam aham prapadye. One must surrenderunto the Supreme Personality of Godhead if he at all wants liberation.As far as the goal of ultimate knowledge is concerned, it is alsoconfirmed in Vedic literature: tam eva viditvati mrtyum eti. "Only byknowing Him can one surpass the boundary of birth and death."(Svetasvatara Upanisad 3.8) He is situated in everyone's heart as thesupreme controller. The Supreme has legs and hands distributedeverywhere, and this cannot be said of the individual soul. Thereforethat there are two knowers of the field of activity, the individualsoul and the Supersoul, must be admitted. One's hands and legs aredistributed locally, but Krsna's hands and legs are distributedeverywhere. This is confirmed in the Svetasvatara Upanisad (3.17):sarvasya prabhum isanam sarvasya saranam brhat. That SupremePersonality of Godhead, Supersoul, is the prabhu or master, of allliving entities; therefore He is the ultimate shelter of all livingentities. So there is no denying the fact that the Supreme Supersouland the individual soul are always different.
TEXT 19
iti ksetram tatha jnanam
jneyam coktam samasatahmad-bhakta etad vijnayamad-bhavayopapadyate
SYNONYMSiti--thus; ksetram--the field of activities (the body); tatha--also;
jnanam--knowledge; jneyam--the knowable; ca--also; uktam--described;samasatah--in summary; mat-bhaktah--My devotee; etat--all this;vijnaya--after understanding; mat-bhavaya--My nature; upapadyate--attains.
TRANSLATION
Thus the field of activities [the body], knowledge and the knowable
have been summarily described by Me. Only My devotees can understandthis thoroughly and thus attain to My nature.
PURPORTThe Lord has described in summary the body, knowledge and the knowable.
This knowledge is of three things: the knower, the knowable and theprocess of knowing. Combined, these are called vijnana, or the scienceof knowledge. Perfect knowledge can be understood by the unalloyeddevotees of the Lord directly. Others are unable to understand. Themonists say that at the ultimate stage these three items become one,but the devotees do not accept this. Knowledge and development ofknowledge mean understanding oneself in Krsna consciousness. We arebeing led by material consciousness, but as soon as we transfer allconsciousness to Krsna's activities and realize that Krsna iseverything, then we attain real knowledge. In other words, knowledge isnothing but the preliminary stage of understanding devotional serviceperfectly.
TEXT 20
prakrtim purusam caiva
viddhy anadi ubhav apivikarams ca gunams caivaviddhi prakrti-sambhavan
SYNONYMSprakrtim--material nature; purusam--living entities; ca--also; eva--
certainly; viddhi--must know; anadi--without beginning; ubhau--both;api--also; vikaran--transformations; ca--also; gunan--three modes ofnature; ca--also; eva--certainly; viddhi--know; prakrti--materialnature; sambhavan--produced of.
TRANSLATIONMaterial nature and the living entities should be understood to be
beginningless. Their transformations and the modes of matter areproducts of material nature.
PURPORTBy this knowledge, the body, the field of activities and the knowers of
the body (both the individual soul and the Supersoul) can be known. Thebody is the field of activity and is composed of material nature. It isthe individual soul which is embodied. Enjoying the activities of thebody is the purusa, or the living entity. He is one knower, and theother is the Supersoul. Of course, it is to be understood that both theSupersoul and the individual entity are different manifestations of theSupreme Personality of Godhead. The living entity is in the category ofHis energy, and the Supersoul is in the category of His personalexpansion.Both material nature and the living entity are eternal. That is to saythat they existed before the creation. The material manifestation isfrom the energy of the Supreme Lord and so also are the livingentities, but they are of the superior energy. Both the living entitiesand material nature existed before this cosmos was manifested. Material
nature was absorbed in the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Maha-Visnu,
and when it was required, it was manifested by the agency of mahat-tattva. Similarly, the living entities are also in Him, and becausethey are conditioned, they are averse to serving the Supreme Lord. Thusthey are not allowed to enter into the spiritual sky. After the windingup of material nature, these living entities are again given a chanceto act in the material world and prepare themselves to enter into thespiritual world. That is the mystery of this material creation.Actually the living entity is originally the spiritual part and parcelof the Supreme Lord, but due to his rebellious nature, he isconditioned within material nature. It really does not matter how theseliving entities or superior entities of the Supreme Lord have come incontact with material nature. The Supreme Personality of Godhead knows,however, how and why this actually took place. In the scriptures theLord says that those attracted by this material nature are undergoing ahard struggle for existence. But we should know it with certainty fromthe descriptions of these few verses that all the transformations andinfluences of material nature by the three modes are also productionsof material nature. All transformations and variety in respect toliving entities are due to the body. As far as spirit is concerned,living entities are all the same.
TEXT 21
karya-karana-kartrtve
hetuh prakrtir ucyatepurusah sukha-duhkhanambhoktrtve hetur ucyate
SYNONYMSkarya--effect; karana--cause; kartrtve--in the matter of creation;
hetuh--instrument; prakrtih--material nature; ucyate--is said to be;purusah--the living entity; sukha--of happiness; duhkhanam--anddistress; bhoktrtve--in enjoyment; hetuh--the instrument; ucyate--issaid to be.
TRANSLATIONNature is said to be the cause of all material activities and effects,
whereas the living entity is the cause of the various sufferings andenjoyments in this world.
PURPORTThe different manifestations of body and senses among the living
entities are due to material nature. There are 8,400,000 differentspecies of life, and these varieties are the creation of the materialnature. They arise from the different sensual pleasures of the livingentity, who thus desires to live in this body or that. When he is putinto different bodies, he enjoys different kinds of happiness anddistress. His material happiness and distress are due to his body, andnot to himself as he is. In his original state there is no doubt ofenjoyment; therefore that is his real state. Because of the desire tolord it over material nature, he is in the material world. In thespiritual world there is no such thing. The spiritual world is pure,but in the material world everyone is struggling hard to acquirevictims who present different pleasures to the body. It might be more
clear to state that this body is the effect of the senses. The senses
are instruments for gratifying desire. Now, the sum total--body andinstrument senses--are offered by material nature and, as will be clearin the next verse, the living entity is blessed or damned withcircumstances according to his past desire and activity. According toone's desires and activities, material nature places one in variousresidential quarters. The being himself is the cause of his attainingsuch residential quarters and his attendant enjoyment or suffering.Once placed in some particular kind of body, he comes under the controlof nature because the body, being matter, acts according to the laws ofnature. At that time, the living entity has no power to change thatlaw. Suppose an entity is put into the body of a dog. As soon as he isput into the body of a dog, he must act like a dog. He cannot actotherwise. And if the living entity is put into the body of a hog, thenhe is forced to eat stool and act like a hog. Similarly, if the livingentity is put into the body of a demigod, he must act according to hisbody. This is the law of nature. But in all circumstances, theSupersoul is with the individual soul. That is explained in the Vedas(Mundaka Upanisad 3.1.1) as follows: dva suparna sayuja sakhayah. TheSupreme Lord is so kind upon the living entity that He alwaysaccompanies the individual soul and in all circumstances is present asthe Supersoul, or Paramatma.
TEXT 22
purusah prakrti-stho hi
bhunkte prakrti-jan gunankaranam guna-sango 'syasad-asad-yoni-janmasu
SYNONYMSpurusah--the living entity; prakrti-sthah--being situated in the
material energy; hi--certainly; bhunkte--enjoys; prakrti-jan--producedby the material nature; gunan--modes of nature; karanam--cause; guna-sangah--association with the modes of nature; asya--of the livingentity; sat-asat--good and bad; yoni--species of life; janmasu--birth.
TRANSLATIONThe living entity in material nature thus follows the ways of life,
enjoying the three modes of nature. This is due to his association withthat material nature. Thus he meets with good and evil amongst variousspecies.
PURPORTThis verse is very important for an understanding of how the living
entities transmigrate from one body to another. It is explained in theSecond Chapter that the living entity is transmigrating from one bodyto another just as one changes dress. This change of dress is due tohis attachment to material existence. As long as he is captivated bythis false manifestation, he has to continue transmigrating from onebody to another. Due to his desire to lord it over material nature, heis put into such undesirable circumstances. Under the influence ofmaterial desire, the entity is born sometimes as a demigod, sometimesas a man, sometimes as a beast, as a bird, as a worm, as an aquatic, asa saintly man, as a bug. This is going on. And in all cases the living
entity thinks himself to be the master of his circumstances, yet he is
under the influence of material nature.How he is put into such different bodies is explained here. It is dueto association with the different modes of nature. One has to rise,therefore, above the three material modes and become situated in thetranscendental position. That is called Krsna consciousness. Unless oneis situated in Krsna consciousness, his material consciousness willoblige him to transfer from one body to another because he has materialdesires since time immemorial. But he has to change that conception.That change can be effected only by hearing from authoritative sources.The best example is here: Arjuna is hearing the science of God fromKrsna. The living entity, if he submits to this hearing process, willlose his long-cherished desire to dominate material nature, andgradually and proportionately, as he reduces his long desire todominate, he comes to enjoy spiritual happiness. In a Vedic mantra itis said that as he becomes learned in association with the SupremePersonality of Godhead, he proportionately relishes his eternalblissful life.
TEXT 23
upadrastanumanta ca
bharta bhokta mahesvarahparamatmeti capy uktodehe 'smin purusah parah
SYNONYMSupadrasta--overseer; anumanta--permitter; ca--also; bharta--master;
bhokta--supreme enjoyer; maha-isvarah--the Supreme Lord; parama-atma--Supersoul; iti--also; ca--and; api uktah--is said; dehe--in this body;asmin--this; purusah--enjoyer; parah--transcendental.
TRANSLATIONYet in this body there is another, a transcendental enjoyer who is the
Lord, the supreme proprietor, who exists as the overseer and permitter,and who is known as the Supersoul.
PURPORTIt is stated here that the Supersoul, who is always with the individual
soul, is the representation of the Supreme Lord. He is not an ordinaryliving entity. Because the monist philosophers take the knower of thebody to be one, they think that there is no difference between theSupersoul and the individual soul. To clarify this, the Lord says thatHe is the representation of Paramatma in every body. He is differentfrom the individual soul; He is para, transcendental. The individualsoul enjoys the activities of a particular field, but the Supersoul ispresent not as finite enjoyer nor as one taking part in bodilyactivities, but as the witness, overseer, permitter and supremeenjoyer. His name is Paramatma, not atma, and He is transcendental. Itis distinctly clear that the atma and Paramatma are different. TheSupersoul, the Paramatma, has legs and hands everywhere, but theindividual soul does not. And because He is the Supreme Lord, He ispresent within to sanction the individual soul's desiring materialenjoyment. Without the sanction of the Supreme Soul, the individualsoul cannot do anything. The individual is bhukta, or the sustained,
and the Lord is bhokta, or the maintainer. There are innumerable living
entities, and He is staying in them as a friend.The fact is that individual living entities are eternally part andparcel of the Supreme Lord, and both of them are very intimatelyrelated as friends. But the living entity has the tendency to rejectthe sanction of the Supreme Lord and act independently in an attempt todominate nature, and because he has this tendency, he is called themarginal energy of the Supreme Lord. The living entity can be situatedeither in the material energy or the spiritual energy. As long as he isconditioned by the material energy, the Supreme Lord, as his friend,the Supersoul, stays with him just to get him to return to thespiritual energy. The Lord is always eager to take him back to thespiritual energy, but due to his minute independence, the individualentity is continually rejecting the association of spiritual light.This misuse of independence is the cause of his material strife in theconditioned nature. The Lord, therefore, is always giving instructionfrom within and from without. From without He gives instructions asstated in Bhagavad-gita, and from within He tries to convince him thathis activities in the material field are not conducive to realhappiness. "Just give it up and turn your face toward Me. Then you willbe happy," He says. Thus the intelligent person who places his faith inthe Paramatma or the Supreme Personality of Godhead begins to advancetoward a blissful eternal life of knowledge.
TEXT 24
ya evam vetti purusam
prakrtim ca gunaih sahasarvatha vartamano 'pina sa bhuyo 'bhijayate
SYNONYMSyah--anyone; evam--thus; vetti--understands; purusam--the living
entity; prakrtim--material nature; ca--and; gunaih--modes of materialnature; saha--with; sarvatha--by all means; vartamanah--situated; api--in spite of; na--never; sah--he; bhuyah--again; abhijayate--takes hisbirth.
TRANSLATIONOne who understands this philosophy concerning material nature, the
living entity and the interaction of the modes of nature is sure toattain liberation. He will not take birth here again, regardless of hispresent position.
PURPORTClear understanding of material nature, the Supersoul, the individual
soul and their interrelation makes one eligible to become liberated andturn to the spiritual atmosphere without being forced to return to thismaterial nature. This is the result of knowledge. The purpose ofknowledge is to understand distinctly that the living entity has bychance fallen into this material existence. By his personal endeavor inassociation with authorities, saintly persons and a spiritual master,he has to understand his position and then revert to spiritualconsciousness or Krsna consciousness by understanding Bhagavad-gita asit is explained by the Personality of Godhead. Then it is certain that
he will never come again into this material existence; he will be
transferred into the spiritual world for a blissful eternal life ofknowledge.
TEXT 25
dhyanenatmani pasyanti
kecid atmanam atmanaanye sankhyena yogenakarma-yogena capare
SYNONYMSdhyanena--by meditation; atmani--self; pasyanti--see; kecit--one;
atmanam--Supersoul; atmana--by the mind; anye--others; sankhyena--byphilosophical discussion; yogena--by the yoga system; karma-yogena--byactivities without fruitive desire; ca--also; apare--others.
TRANSLATIONThat Supersoul is perceived by some through meditation, by some through
the cultivation of knowledge, and by others through working withoutfruitive desire.
PURPORTThe Lord informs Arjuna that the conditioned souls can be divided into
two classes as far as man's search for self-realization is concerned.Those who are atheists, agnostics and skeptics are beyond the sense ofspiritual understanding. But there are others who are faithful in theirunderstanding of spiritual life, and they are called workers who haverenounced fruitive results. Those who always try to establish thedoctrine of monism are also counted amongst the atheists and agnostics.In other words, only the devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godheadare really capable of spiritual understanding because they understandthat beyond this material nature there is the spiritual world and theSupreme Personality of Godhead who is expanded as the Paramatma, theSupersoul in everyone, the all-pervading Godhead. Of course there arethose who try to understand the Supreme Absolute Truth by cultivationof knowledge, and they can be counted in the second class. Theatheistic philosophers analyze this material world into twenty-fourelements, and they place the individual soul as the twenty-fifth item.When they are able to understand the nature of the individual soul tobe transcendental to the material elements, they are able to understandalso that above the individual soul there is the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. He is the twenty-sixth element. Thus gradually they also cometo the standard of devotional service in Krsna consciousness. Those whowork without fruitive results are also perfect in their attitude. Theyare given a chance to advance to the platform of devotional service inKrsna consciousness. Here it is stated that there are some people whoare pure in consciousness and who try to find out the Supersoul bymeditation, and when they discover the Supersoul within themselves,they become transcendentally situated. Similarly, there are others whoalso try to understand the Supreme Soul by cultivation of knowledge,and there are others who cultivate the hatha-yoga system and who try tosatisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead by childish activities.
TEXT 26
anye tv evam ajanantah
srutvanyebhya upasatete 'pi catitaranty evamrtyum sruti-parayanah
SYNONYMSanye--others; tu--but; evam--thus; ajanantah--without spiritual
knowledge; srutva--by hearing; anyebhyah--from others; upasate--beginto worship; te--they; api--also; ca--and; atitaranti--transcend; eva--certainly; mrtyum--the path of death; sruti-parayanah--inclined to theprocess of hearing.
TRANSLATIONAgain there are those who, although not conversant in spiritual
knowledge, begin to worship the Supreme Person upon hearing about Himfrom others. Because of their tendency to hear from authorities, theyalso transcend the path of birth and death.
PURPORTThis verse is particularly applicable to modern society because in
modern society there is practically no education in spiritual matters.Some of the people may appear to be atheistic or agnostic orphilosophical, but actually there is no knowledge of philosophy. As forthe common man, if he is a good soul, then there is a chance foradvancement by hearing. This hearing process is very important. LordCaitanya, who preached Krsna consciousness in the modern world, gavegreat stress to hearing because if the common man simply hears fromauthoritative sources, he can progress, especially, according to LordCaitanya, if he hears the transcendental vibration Hare Krsna, HareKrsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, HareHare. It is stated, therefore, that all men should take advantage ofhearing from realized souls and gradually become able to understandeverything. The worship of the Supreme Lord will then undoubtedly takeplace. Lord Caitanya has said that in this age no one needs to changehis position, but one should give up the endeavor to understand theAbsolute Truth by speculative reasoning. One should learn to become theservant of those who are in knowledge of the Supreme Lord. If one isfortunate enough to take shelter of a pure devotee, hear from him aboutself-realization and follow in his footsteps, he will be graduallyelevated to the position of a pure devotee. In this verse particularly,the process of hearing is strongly recommended, and this is veryappropriate. Although the common man is often not as capable as so-called philosophers, faithful hearing from an authoritative person willhelp one transcend this material existence and go back to Godhead, backto home.
TEXT 27
yavat sanjayate kincit
sattvam sthavara-jangamamksetra-ksetrajna-samyogattad viddhi bharatarsabha
SYNONYMS
yavat--whatever; sanjayate--takes place; kincit--anything; sattvam--
existence; sthavara--not moving; jangamam--moving; ksetra--the body;ksetra-jna--knower of the body; samyogat--union between; tat viddhi--you must know it; bharata-rsabha--O chief of the Bharatas.
TRANSLATIONO chief of the Bharatas, whatever you see in existence, both moving and
unmoving, is only the combination of the field of activities and theknower of the field.
PURPORTBoth material nature and the living entity, which were existing before
the creation of the cosmos, are explained in this verse. Whatever iscreated is but a combination of the living entity and material nature.There are many manifestations like trees, mountains and hills, whichare not moving, and there are many existences which are moving, and allof them are but combinations of material nature and superior nature,the living entity. Without the touch of superior nature, the livingentity, nothing can grow. Therefore the relationship between matter andnature is eternally going on, and this combination is effected by theSupreme Lord; therefore He is the controller of both the superior andinferior natures. The material nature is created by Him, and thesuperior nature is placed in this material nature, and thus all theseactivities and manifestations take place.
TEXT 28
samam sarvesu bhutesu
tisthantam paramesvaramvinasyatsv avinasyantamyah pasyati sa pasyati
SYNONYMSsamam--equally; sarvesu--in all; bhutesu--living entities; tisthan-tam-
-residing; parama-isvaram--the Supersoul; vinasyatsu--in thedestructible; avinasyantam--not destroyed; yah--anyone; pasyati--sees;sah--he; pasyati--actually sees.
TRANSLATIONOne who sees the Supersoul accompanying the individual soul in all
bodies, and who understands that neither the soul nor the Supersoul isever destroyed, actually sees.
PURPORTAnyone who can see three things--the body, the proprietor of the body,
or individual soul, and the friend of the individual soul, combinedtogether by good association--is actually in knowledge. Those who arenot associated with the soul's friend are ignorant; they simply see thebody, and when the body is destroyed they think that everything isfinished, but actually it is not so. After the destruction of the body,both the soul and the Supersoul exist, and they go on eternally in manyvarious moving and unmoving forms. The Sanskrit word paramesvara is
sometimes translated as "the individual soul" because the soul is the
master of the body, and after the destruction of the body he transfersto another form. In that way he is master. But there are others whointerpret this paramesvara to be the Supersoul. In either case, boththe Supersoul and the individual soul continue. They are not destroyed.One who can see in this way can actually see what is happening.
TEXT 29
samam pasyan hi sarvatra
samavasthitam isvaramna hinasty atmanatmanamtato yati param gatim
SYNONYMSsamam--equally; pasyan--seeing; hi--certainly; sarvatra--everywhere;
samavasthitam--equally situated; isvaram--Supersoul; na--does not;hinasti--degrade; atmana--by the mind; atmanam--the soul; tatah yati--then reaches; param--the transcendental; gatim--destination.
TRANSLATIONOne who sees the Supersoul in every living being and equal everywhere
does not degrade himself by his mind. Thus he approaches thetranscendental destination.
PURPORTThe living entity, by accepting his material existence as just so much
suffering, can become situated in his spiritual existence. If oneunderstands that the Supreme is situated in His Paramatma manifestationeverywhere, that is, if one can see the presence of the SupremePersonality of Godhead in every living thing, he does not degradehimself, and he therefore gradually advances to the spiritual world.The mind is generally addicted to self-centered processes; but when themind turns to the Supersoul, one becomes advanced in spiritualunderstanding.
TEXT 30
prakrtyaiva ca karmani
kriyamanani sarvasahyah pasyati tathatmanamakartaram sa pasyati
SYNONYMSprakrtya--by material nature; eva--certainly; ca--also; karmani--
activities; kriyamanani--engaged in performing; sarvasah--in allrespects; yah--anyone who; pasyati--sees; tatha--also; atmanam--himself; akartaram--non-doer; sah--he; pasyati--sees perfectly.
TRANSLATIONOne who can see that all activities are performed by the body, which is
created of material nature, and sees that the self does nothing,actually sees.
PURPORT
This body is made by material nature under the direction of the
Supersoul, and whatever activities are going on in respect to one'sbody are not his doing. Whatever one is supposed to do, either forhappiness or for distress, one is forced to do because of the bodilyconstitution. The self, however, is outside all these bodilyactivities. This body is given according to one's past desires. Tofulfill desires, one is given the body, with which he acts accordingly.Practically speaking, the body is a machine, designed by the SupremeLord, to fulfill desires. Because of desires, one is put into difficultcircumstances to suffer or to enjoy. This transcendental vision of theliving entity, when developed, makes one separate from bodilyactivities. One who has such a vision is an actual seer.
TEXT 31
yada bhuta-prthag-bhavam
eka-stham anupasyatitata eva ca vistarambrahma sampadyate tada
SYNONYMSyada--when; bhuta--living entities; prthak-bhavam--separated
identities; eka-stham--situated in one; anupasyati--tries to seethrough authority; tatah eva--thereafter; ca--also; vistaram--expanded;brahma--the Absolute; sampadyate--attains; tada--at that time.
TRANSLATIONWhen a sensible man ceases to see different identities, which are due
to different material bodies, he attains to the Brahman conception.Thus he sees that beings are expanded everywhere.
PURPORTWhen one can see that the various bodies of living entities arise due
to the different desires of the individual soul and do not actuallybelong to the soul itself, one actually sees. In the materialconception of life, we find someone a demigod, someone a human being, adog, a cat, etc. This is material vision, not actual vision. Thismaterial differentiation is due to a material conception of life. Afterthe destruction of the material body, the spirit soul is one. Thespirit soul, due to contact with material nature, gets different typesof bodies. When one can see this, he attains spiritual vision; thusbeing freed from differentiations like man, animal, big, low, etc., onebecomes purified in his consciousness and able to develop Krsnaconsciousness in his spiritual identity. How he then sees things willbe explained in the next verse.
TEXT 32
anaditvan nirgunatvat
paramatmayam avyayahsarira-stho 'pi kaunteyana karoti na lipyate
SYNONYMS
anaditvat--due to eternity; nirgunatvat--due to transcendental; parama-
-beyond material nature; atma--spirit; ayam--this; avyayah--inexhaustible; sarira-sthah api--though dwelling in the body; kaunteya--O son of Kunti; na karoti--never does anything; na lipyate--nor is heentangled.
TRANSLATIONThose with the vision of eternity can see that the soul is
transcendental, eternal, and beyond the modes of nature. Despitecontact with the material body, O Arjuna, the soul neither doesanything nor is entangled.
PURPORTA living entity appears to be born because of the birth of the material
body, but actually the living entity is eternal; he is not born, and inspite of his being situated in a material body, he is transcendentaland eternal. Thus he cannot be destroyed. By nature he is full ofbliss. He does not engage himself in any material activities; thereforethe activities performed due to his contact with material bodies do notentangle him.
TEXT 33
yatha sarva-gatam sauksmyad
akasam nopalipyatesarvatravasthito dehetathatma nopalipyate
SYNONYMSyatha--as; sarva-gatam--all-pervading; sauksmyat--due to being subtle;
akasam--the sky; na--never; upalipyate--mixes; sarvatra--everywhere;avasthitah--situated; dehe--in the body; tatha--such; atma--the self;na--never; upalipyate--mixes.
TRANSLATIONThe sky, due to its subtle nature, does not mix with anything, although
it is all-pervading. Similarly, the soul, situated in Brahman vision,does not mix with the body, though situated in that body.
PURPORTThe air enters into water, mud, stool and whatever else is there; still
it does not mix with anything. Similarly, the living entity, eventhough situated in varieties of bodies, is aloof from them due to hissubtle nature. Therefore it is impossible to see with the material eyeshow the living entity is in contact with this body and how he is out ofit after the destruction of the body. No one in science can ascertainthis.
TEXT 34
yatha prakasayaty ekah
krtsnam lokam imam ravihksetram ksetri tatha krtsnamprakasayati bharata
SYNONYMSyatha--as; prakasayati--illuminates; ekah--one; krtsnam--the whole;
lokam--universe; imam--this; ravih--the sun; ksetram--this body;ksetri--the soul; tatha--similarly; krtsnam--all; prakasayati--illuminates; bharata--O son of Bharata.
TRANSLATIONO son of Bharata, as the sun alone illuminates all this universe, so
does the living entity, one within the body, illuminate the entire bodyby consciousness.
PURPORTThere are various theories regarding consciousness. Here in Bhagavad-
gita the example of the sun and the sunshine is given. As the sun issituated in one place, but is illuminating the whole universe, so asmall particle of spirit soul, although situated in the heart of thisbody, is illuminating the whole body by consciousness. Thusconsciousness is the proof of the presence of the soul, as sunshine orlight is the proof of the presence of the sun. When the soul is presentin the body, there is consciousness all over the body, and as soon asthe soul has passed from the body, there is no more consciousness. Thiscan be easily understood by any intelligent man. Thereforeconsciousness is not a production of the combinations of matter. It isthe symptom of the living entity. The consciousness of the livingentity, although qualitatively one with the supreme consciousness, isnot supreme because the consciousness of one particular body does notshare that of another body. But the Supersoul, which is situated in allbodies as the friend of the individual soul, is conscious of allbodies. That is the difference between supreme consciousness andindividual consciousness.
TEXT 35
ksetra-ksetrajnayor evam
antaram jnana-caksusabhuta-prakrti-moksam caye vidur yanti te param
SYNONYMSksetra--body; ksetra-jnayoh--of the proprietor of the body; evam--that;
antaram--difference; jnana-caksusa--by vision of knowledge; bhuta--living entity; prakrti--material nature; moksam--liberation; ca--also;ye--one who; viduh--knows; yanti--approaches; te--they; param--Supreme.
TRANSLATIONOne who knowingly sees this difference between the body and the owner
of the body and can understand the process of liberation from thisbondage, also attains to the supreme goal.
PURPORT
The purport of this Thirteenth Chapter is that one should know the
distinction between the body, the owner of the body, and the Supersoul.A faithful person should at first have some good association to hear ofGod and thus gradually become enlightened. If one accepts a spiritualmaster, he can learn to distinguish between matter and spirit, and thatbecomes the steppingstone for further spiritual realization. Aspiritual master teaches his students to get free from the materialconcept of life by various instructions. For instance, in Bhagavad-gitawe find Krsna instructing Arjuna to free him from materialisticconsiderations.One can understand that this body is matter; it can be analyzed withits twenty-four elements. That is the gross manifestation. And thesubtle manifestation is the mind and psychological effects. And thesymptoms of life are the interaction of these features. But over andabove this, there is the soul, and there is also the Supersoul. Thesoul and the Supersoul are two. This material world is working by theconjunction of the soul and the twenty-four material elements. One whocan see the constitution of the whole material manifestation as thiscombination of the soul and material elements and also can see thesituation of the Supreme Soul becomes eligible for transfer to thespiritual world. These things are meant for contemplation and forrealization, and one should have a complete understanding of thischapter with the help of the spiritual master.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Thirteenth Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Nature, the Enjoyer andConsciousness.
Chapter 14
The Three Modes Of Material Nature
TEXT 1
sri-bhagavan uvaca
param bhuyah pravaksyamijnananam jnanam uttamamyaj jnatva munayah sarveparam siddhim ito gatah
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; param--
transcendental; bhuyah--again; pravaksyami--I shall speak; jnananam--ofall knowledge; jnanam--knowledge; uttamam--the supreme; yat--which;jnatva--knowing; munayah--the sages; sarve--all; param--transcendental;siddhim--perfection; itah--from this world; gatah--attained.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: Again I shall declare to you this supreme
wisdom, the best of all knowledge, knowing which all the sages haveattained the supreme perfection.
PURPORT
From the Seventh Chapter to the end of the Twelfth Chapter, Sri Krsna
in detail reveals the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. Now, the Lord Himself is further enlightening Arjuna. If oneunderstands this chapter through the process of philosophicalspeculation, he will come to an understanding of devotional service. Inthe Thirteenth Chapter, it was clearly explained that by humblydeveloping knowledge one may possibly be freed from materialentanglement. It has also been explained that it is due to associationwith the modes of nature that the living entity is entangled in thismaterial world. Now, in this chapter, the Supreme Personality explainswhat those modes of nature are, how they act, how they bind and howthey give liberation. The knowledge explained in this chapter isproclaimed by the Supreme Lord to be superior to the knowledge given sofar in other chapters. By understanding this knowledge, various greatsages attained perfection and transferred to the spiritual world. TheLord now explains the same knowledge in a better way. This knowledge isfar, far superior to all other processes of knowledge thus farexplained, and knowing this many attained perfection. Thus it isexpected that one who understands this Fourteenth Chapter will attainperfection.
TEXT 2
idam jnanam upasritya
mama sadharmyam agatahsarge 'pi nopajayantepralaye na vyathanti ca
SYNONYMSidam--this; jnanam--knowledge; upasritya--taking shelter of; mama--My;
sadharmyam--nature; agatah--attained; sarge api--even in the creation;na--never; upajayante--comes in; pralaye--in the annihilation; na--nor;vyathanti--disturbed; ca--also.
TRANSLATIONBy becoming fixed in this knowledge, one can attain to the
transcendental nature, which is like My own nature. Thus established,one is not born at the time of creation nor disturbed at the time ofdissolution.
PURPORTAfter acquiring perfect transcendental knowledge, one acquires
qualitative equality with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, becomingfree from the repetition of birth and death. One does not, however,lose his identity as an individual soul. It is understood from Vedicliterature that the liberated souls who have reached the transcendentalplanets of the spiritual sky always look to the lotus feet of theSupreme Lord, being engaged in His transcendental loving service. So,even after liberation, the devotees do not lose their individualidentities.Generally, in the material world, whatever knowledge we get iscontaminated by the three modes of material nature. But knowledge whichis not contaminated by the three modes of nature is calledtranscendental knowledge. As soon as one is situated in thattranscendental knowledge, he is on the same platform as that of the
Supreme Person. Those who have no knowledge of the spiritual sky hold
that after being freed from the material activities of the materialform, this spiritual identity becomes formless, without anyvariegatedness. However, just as there is material variegatedness inthis world, so, in the spiritual world, there is also variegatedness.Those in ignorance of this think that spiritual existence is opposed tomaterial variety. But actually, in the spiritual sky, one attainsspiritual form. There are spiritual activities, and the spiritualsituation is called devotional life. That atmosphere is said to beuncontaminated and there one is equal in quality with the Supreme Lord.To obtain such knowledge, one must develop all the spiritual qualities.One who thus develops the spiritual qualities is not affected either bythe creation or the destruction of the material world.
TEXT 3
mama yonir mahad brahma
tasmin garbham dadhamy ahamsambhavah sarva-bhutanamtato bhavati bharata
SYNONYMSmama--My; yonih--source of birth; mahat--the total material existence;
brahma--supreme; tasmin--in that; garbham--pregnancy; dadhami--create;aham--I; sambhavah--possibility; sarva-bhutanam--of all livingentities; tatah--thereafter; bhavati--becomes; bharata--O son ofBharata.
TRANSLATIONThe total material substance, called Brahman, is the source of birth,
and it is that Brahman that I impregnate, making possible the births ofall living beings, O son of Bharata.
PURPORTThis is an explanation of the world: everything that takes place is due
to the combination of ksetra and ksetra-jna, the body and the spiritsoul. This combination of material nature and the living entity is madepossible by the Supreme God Himself. The mahat-tattva is the totalcause of the total cosmic manifestation, and because in the totalsubstance of the material cause there are three modes of nature, it issometimes called Brahman. The Supreme Personality impregnates thattotal substance, and thus innumerable universes become possible. Thistotal material substance, the mahat-tattva, is described as Brahman inthe Vedic literature (Mundaka Upanisad 1.1.19): tasmad etad brahmanama-rupam annam ca jayate. Into that Brahman the seeds of the livingentities are impregnated by the Supreme Person. The twenty-fourelements, beginning from earth, water, fire and air, are all materialenergy, called mahad brahma, or the great Brahman, the material nature.As is explained in the Seventh Chapter, beyond this there is another,superior nature--the living entity. In material nature the superiornature is mixed by the will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, andthereafter all living entities are born of this material nature.The scorpion lays its eggs in piles of rice, and sometimes it is saidthat the scorpion is born out of rice. But the rice is not the cause ofthe scorpion. Actually, the eggs were laid by the mother. Similarly,
material nature is not the cause of the birth of the living entities.
The seed is given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and they onlyseem to come out as products of material nature. Thus every livingentity, according to his past activities, has a different body, createdby this material nature, and the entity can enjoy or suffer accordingto his past deeds. The Lord is the cause of all the manifestations ofliving entities in this material world.
TEXT 4
sarva-yonisu kaunteya
murtayah sambhavanti yahtasam brahma mahad yoniraham bija-pradah pita
SYNONYMSsarva-yonisu--in all species of life; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
murtayah--forms; sambhavanti--as they appear; yah--which; tasam--all ofthem; brahma--supreme; mahat yonih--the source of birth in the materialsubstance; aham--Myself; bija-pradah--seed-giving; pita--father.
TRANSLATIONIt should be understood that all species of life, O son of Kunti, are
made possible by birth in this material nature, and that I am the seed-giving father.
PURPORTIn this verse it is clearly explained that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Krsna, is the original father of all living entities. Theliving entities are combinations of the material nature and thespiritual nature. Such living entities are seen not only on thisplanet, but in every planet, even in the highest, where Brahma issituated. Everywhere there are living entities; within the earth thereare living entities, even within water and within fire. All theseappearances are due to the mother, material nature, and Krsna's seed-giving process. The purport is that the living entities, beingimpregnated in the material world, come out in various forms at thetime of creation according to their past deeds.
TEXT 5
sattvam rajas tama iti
gunah prakrti-sambhavahnibadhnanti maha-bahodehe dehinam avyayam
SYNONYMSsattvam--mode of goodness; rajah--mode of passion; tamah--mode of
ignorance; iti--thus; gunah--qualities; prakrti--material nature;sambhavah--produced of; nibadhnanti--does condition; maha-baho--Omighty-armed one; dehe--in this body; dehinam--the living entity;avyayam--eternal.
TRANSLATION
Material nature consists of the three modes--goodness, passion and
ignorance. When the living entity comes in contact with nature, hebecomes conditioned by these modes.
PURPORTThe living entity, because he is transcendental, has nothing to do with
this material nature. Still, because he has become conditioned by thematerial world, he is acting under the spell of the three modes ofmaterial nature. Because living entities have different kinds ofbodies, in terms of the different aspects of nature, they are inducedto act according to that nature. This is the cause of the varieties ofhappiness and distress.
TEXT 6
tatra sattvam nirmalatvat
prakasakam anamayamsukha-sangena badhnatijnana-sangena canagha
SYNONYMStatra--thereafter; sattvam--mode of goodness; nirmalatvat--being purest
in the material world; prakasakam--illuminating; anamayam--without anysinful reaction; sukha--happiness; sangena--association; badhnati--conditions; jnana--knowledge; sangena--association; ca--also; anagha--Osinless one.
TRANSLATIONO sinless one, the mode of goodness, being purer than the others, is
illuminating, and it frees one from all sinful reactions. Thosesituated in that mode develop knowledge, but they become conditionedby the concept of happiness.
PURPORTThe living entities conditioned by material nature are of various
types. One is happy, another is very active, and another is helpless.All these types of psychological manifestations are causes of theentities' conditioned status in nature. How they are differentlyconditioned is explained in this section of Bhagavad-gita. The mode ofgoodness is first considered. The effect of developing the mode ofgoodness in the material world is that one becomes wiser than thoseotherwise conditioned. A man in the mode of goodness is not so muchaffected by material miseries, and he has a sense of advancement inmaterial knowledge. The representative type is the brahmana, who issupposed to be situated in the mode of goodness. This sense ofhappiness is due to understanding that, in the mode of goodness, one ismore or less free from sinful reactions. Actually, in the Vedicliterature it is said that the mode of goodness means greater knowledgeand a greater sense of happiness.The difficulty here is that when a living entity is situated in themode of goodness, he becomes conditioned to feel that he is advanced inknowledge and is better than others. In this way he becomesconditioned. The best examples are the scientist and philosopher: each
is very proud of his knowledge, and because they generally improve
their living conditions, they feel a sort of material happiness. Thissense of advanced happiness in conditioned life makes them bound by themode of goodness of material nature. As such, they are attracted towardworking in the mode of goodness, and, as long as they have anattraction for working in that way, they have to take some type of bodyin the modes of nature. Thus there is no likelihood of liberation, orof being transferred to the spiritual world. Repeatedly one may becomea philosopher, a scientist or a poet, and repeatedly become entangledin the same disadvantages of birth and death. But, due to the illusionof the material energy, one thinks that that sort of life is pleasant.
TEXT 7
rajo ragatmakam viddhi
trsna-sanga-samudbhavamtan nibadhnati kaunteyakarma-sangena dehinam
SYNONYMSrajah--the mode of passion; raga-atmakam--born of desire or lust;
viddhi--know; trsna--with hankering; sanga--association; samudbhavam--produced of; tat--that; nibadhnati--binds; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;karma-sangena--by association with fruitive activity; dehinam--theembodied.
TRANSLATIONThe mode of passion is born of unlimited desires and longings, O son of
Kunti, and because of this the embodied living entity is bound tomaterial fruitive actions.
PURPORTThe mode of passion is characterized by the attraction between man and
woman. Woman has attraction for man, and man has attraction for woman.This is called the mode of passion. And, when the mode of passion isincreased, one develops the hankering for material enjoyment. He wantsto enjoy sense gratification. For sense gratification, a man in themode of passion wants some honor in society, or in the nation, and hewants to have a happy family, with nice children, wife, and house.These are the products of the mode of passion. As long as one ishankering after these things, he has to work very hard. Therefore it isclearly stated here that he becomes associated with the fruits of hisactivities and thus becomes bound by such activities. In order toplease his wife, children and society and to keep up his prestige, onehas to work. Therefore, the whole material world is more or less in themode of passion. Modern civilization is considered to be advanced inthe standards of the mode of passion. Formerly, the advanced conditionwas considered to be in the mode of goodness. If there is no liberationfor those in the mode of goodness, what to speak of those who areentangled in the mode of passion?
TEXT 8
tamas tv ajnana-jam viddhi
mohanam sarva-dehinam
pramadalasya-nidrabhis
tan nibadhnati bharata
SYNONYMStamah--mode of ignorance; tu--but; ajnana-jam--products of ignorance;
viddhi--knowing; mohanam--delusion; sarva-dehinam--of all embodiedbeings; pramada--madness; alasya--indolence; nidrabhih--sleep; tat--that; nibadhnati--binds; bharata--O son of Bharata.
TRANSLATIONO son of Bharata, the mode of darkness causes the delusion of all
living entities. The result of this mode is madness, indolence andsleep, which bind the conditioned soul.
PURPORTIn this verse the specific application of the word tu is very
significant. This means that the mode of ignorance is a very peculiarqualification of the embodied soul. This mode of ignorance is just theopposite of the mode of goodness. In the mode of goodness, bydevelopment of knowledge, one can understand what is what, but the modeof ignorance is just the opposite. Everyone under the spell of the modeof ignorance becomes mad, and a madman cannot understand what is what.Instead of making advancement, one becomes degraded. The definition ofthe mode of ignorance is stated in the Vedic literature. Vastu-yathatmya-jnanavarakam viparyaya-jnana-janakam tamah: under the spellof ignorance, one cannot understand a thing as it is. For example,everyone can see that his grandfather has died, and therefore he willalso die; man is mortal. The children that he conceives will also die.So death is sure. Still, people are madly accumulating money andworking very hard all day and night, not caring for the eternal spirit.This is madness. In their madness, they are very reluctant to makeadvancement in spiritual understanding. Such people are very lazy. Whenthey are invited to associate for spiritual understanding, they are notmuch interested. They are not even active like the man who iscontrolled by the mode of passion. Thus another symptom of one embeddedin the mode of ignorance is that he sleeps more than is required. Sixhours of sleep is sufficient, but a man in the mode of ignorance sleepsat least ten or twelve hours a day. Such a man appears to be alwaysdejected and is addicted to intoxicants and sleeping. These are thesymptoms of a person conditioned by the mode of ignorance.
TEXT 9
sattvam sukhe sanjayati
rajah karmani bharatajnanam avrtya tu tamahpramade sanjayaty uta
SYNONYMSsattvam--mode of goodness; sukhe--in happiness; sanjayati--develops;
rajah--mode of passion; karmani--fruits of activities; bharata--O sonof Bharata; jnanam--knowledge; avrtya--covering; tu--but; tamah--themode of ignorance; pramade--in madness; sanjayati--develops; uta--it issaid.
TRANSLATION
The mode of goodness conditions one to happiness, passion conditions
him to fruits of action, and ignorance to madness.
PURPORTA person in the mode of goodness is satisfied by his work or
intellectual pursuit, just as a philosopher, scientist, or educator maybe engaged in a particular field of knowledge and may be satisfied inthat way. A man in the modes of passion and goodness may be engaged infruitive activity, he owns as much as he can and spends for goodcauses. Sometimes he tries to open hospitals, give to charityinstitutions, etc. These are the signs of one in the mode of passion.And the mode of ignorance covers knowledge. In the mode of ignorance,whatever one does is neither good for him nor for anyone.
TEXT 10
rajas tamas cabhibhuya
sattvam bhavati bharatarajah sattvam tamas caivatamah sattvam rajas tatha
SYNONYMSrajah--mode of passion; tamah--mode of ignorance; ca--also; abhibhuya--
also surpassing; sattvam--mode of goodness; bhavati--becomes prominent;bharata--O son of Bharata; rajah--mode of passion; sattvam--mode ofgoodness; tamah--mode of ignorance; ca--also; eva--like that; tamah--mode of ignorance; sattvam--mode of goodness; rajah--mode of passion;tatha--as in this.
TRANSLATIONSometimes the mode of passion becomes prominent, defeating the mode of
goodness, O son of Bharata. And sometimes the mode of goodness defeatspassion, and at other times the mode of ignorance defeats goodness andpassion. In this way there is always competition for supremacy.
PURPORTWhen the mode of passion is prominent, the modes of goodness and
ignorance are defeated. When the mode of goodness is prominent, passionand ignorance are defeated. And when the mode of ignorance isprominent, passion and goodness are defeated. This competition isalways going on. Therefore, one who is actually intent on advancing inKrsna consciousness has to transcend these three modes. The prominenceof some certain mode of nature is manifested in one's dealings, in hisactivities, in eating, etc. All this will be explained in laterchapters. But if one wants, he can develop, by practice, the mode ofgoodness and thus defeat the modes of ignorance and passion. One cansimilarly develop the mode of passion and defeat goodness andignorance. Or, one can develop the mode of ignorance and defeatgoodness and passion. Although there are these three modes of materialnature, if one is determined, he can be blessed by the mode ofgoodness, and by transcending the mode of goodness he can be situated
in pure goodness, which is called the vasudeva state, a state in which
one can understand the science of God. By the manifestation ofparticular activities, it can be understood in what mode of nature oneis situated.
TEXT 11
sarva-dvaresu dehe 'smin
prakasa upajayatejnanam yada tada vidyadvivrddham sattvam ity uta
SYNONYMSsarva-dvaresu--all the gates; dehe asmin--in this body; prakasah--
quality of illumination; upajayate--develops; jnanam--knowledge; yada--when; tada--at that time; vidyat--must know; vivrddham--increased;sattvam--the mode of goodness; iti--thus; uta--said.
TRANSLATIONThe manifestations of the mode of goodness can be experienced when all
the gates of the body are illuminated by knowledge.
PURPORTThere are nine gates in the body: two eyes, two ears, two nostrils, the
mouth, the genitals and the anus. In every gate, when the symptom ofgoodness is illuminated, it should be understood that one has developedthe mode of goodness. In the mode of goodness, one can see things inthe right position, one can hear things in the right position, and onecan taste things in the right position. One becomes cleansed inside andoutside. In every gate there is development of the symptoms ofhappiness, and that is the position of goodness.
TEXT 12
lobhah pravrttir arambhah
karmanam asamah sprharajasy etani jayantevivrddhe bharatarsabha
SYNONYMSlobhah--greed; pravrttih--hankering; arambhah--endeavor; karmanam--of
activities; asamah--uncontrollable; sprha--desire; rajasi--in the modeof passion; etani--all this; jayante--develop; vivrddhe--when there isexcess; bharata-rsabha--O chief of the descendants of Bharata.
TRANSLATIONO chief of the Bharatas, when there is an increase in the mode of
passion, the symptoms of great attachment, uncontrollable desire,hankering, and intense endeavor develop.
PURPORT
One in the mode of passion is never satisfied with the position he has
already acquired; he hankers to increase his position. If he wants toconstruct a residential house, he tries his best to have a palatialhouse, as if he would be able to reside in that house eternally. And hedevelops a great hankering for sense gratification. There is no end tosense gratification. He always wants to remain with his family and inhis house and to continue the process of sense gratification. There isno cessation of this. All these symptoms should be understood ascharacteristic of the mode of passion.
TEXT 13
aprakaso 'pravrttis ca
pramado moha eva catamasy etani jayantevivrddhe kuru-nandana
SYNONYMSaprakasah--darkness; apravrttih--inactivity; ca--and; pramadah--
madness; mohah--illusion; eva--certainly; ca--also; tamasi--of the modeof ignorance; etani--these; jayante--are manifested; vivrddhe--isdeveloped; kuru-nandana--O son of Kuru.
TRANSLATIONO son of Kuru, when there is an increase in the mode of ignorance,
madness, illusion, inertia and darkness are manifested.
PURPORTWhen there is no illumination, knowledge is absent. One in the mode of
ignorance does not work by a regulative principle; he wants to actwhimsically for no purpose. Even though he has the capacity to work, hemakes no endeavor. This is called illusion. Although consciousness isgoing on, life is inactive. These are the symptoms of one in the modeof ignorance.
TEXT 14
yada sattve pravrddhe tu
pralayam yati deha-bhrttadottama-vidam lokanamalan pratipadyate
SYNONYMSyada--when; sattve--mode of goodness; pravrddhe--in development; tu--
but; pralayam--dissolution; yati--goes; deha-bhrt--embodied; tada--atthat time; uttama-vidam--of the great sages; lokan--the planets;amalan--pure; pratipadyate--attains.
TRANSLATIONWhen one dies in the mode of goodness, he attains to the pure higher
planets.
PURPORT
One in goodness attains higher planetary systems, like Brahmaloka or
Janoloka, and there enjoys godly happiness. The word amalan issignificant; it means free from the modes of passion and ignorance.There are impurities in the material world, but the mode of goodness isthe purest form of existence in the material world. There are differentkinds of planets for different kinds of living entities. Those who diein the mode of goodness are elevated to the planets where great sagesand great devotees live.
TEXT 15
rajasi pralayam gatva
karma-sangisu jayatetatha pralinas tamasimudha-yonisu jayate
SYNONYMSrajasi--in passion; pralayam--dissolution; gatva--attaining; karma-
sangisu--in the association of fruitive activities; jayate--takesbirth; tatha--thereafter; pralinah--being dissolved; tamasi--inignorance; mudha--animal; yonisu--species; jayate--take birth.
TRANSLATIONWhen one dies in the mode of passion, he takes birth among those
engaged in fruitive activities; and when he dies in the mode ofignorance, he takes birth in the animal kingdom.
PURPORTSome people have the impression that when the soul reaches the platform
of human life, it never goes down again. This is incorrect. Accordingto this verse, if one develops the mode of ignorance, after his deathhe is degraded to an animal form of life. From there one has to againelevate himself, by an evolutionary process, to come again to the humanform of life. Therefore, those who are actually serious about humanlife should take to the mode of goodness and in good associationtranscend the modes and become situated in Krsna consciousness. This isthe aim of human life. Otherwise, there is no guarantee that the humanbeing will again attain to the human status.
TEXT 16
karmanah sukrtasyahuh
sattvikam nirmalam phalamrajasas tu phalam duhkhamajnanam tamasah phalam
SYNONYMSkarmanah--of work; su-krtasya--in the mode of goodness; ahuh--said;
sattvikam--mode of goodness; nirmalam--purified; phalam--result;rajasah--of the mode of passion; tu--but; phalam--result; duhkham--misery; ajnanam--nonsense; tamasah--of the mode of ignorance; phalam--result.
TRANSLATION
By acting in the mode of goodness, one becomes purified. Works done in
the mode of passion result in distress, and actions performed in themode of ignorance result in foolishness.
PURPORTBy pious activities in the mode of goodness one is purified; therefore
the sages, who are free from all illusion, are situated in happiness.Similarly activities in the mode of passion are simply miserable. Anyactivity for material happiness is bound to be defeated. If, forexample, one wants to have a skyscraper, so much human misery has to beundergone before a big skyscraper can be built. The financier has totake much trouble to earn a mass of wealth, and those who are slavingto construct the building have to render physical toil. The miseriesare there. Thus Bhagavad-gita says that in any activity performed underthe spell of the mode of passion, there is definitely great misery.There may be a little so-called mental happiness--"I have this house orthis money"--but this is not actual happiness.As far as the mode of ignorance is concerned, the performer is withoutknowledge, and therefore all his activities result in present misery,and afterwards he will go on toward animal life. Animal life is alwaysmiserable, although, under the spell of the illusory energy, maya, theanimals do not understand this. Slaughtering poor animals is also dueto the mode of ignorance. The animal killers do not know that in thefuture the animal will have a body suitable to kill them. That is thelaw of nature. In human society, if one kills a man he has to behanged. That is the law of the state. Because of ignorance, people donot perceive that there is a complete state controlled by the SupremeLord. Every living creature is a son of the Supreme Lord, and He doesnot tolerate even an ant's being killed. One has to pay for it. So,indulgence in animal killing for the taste of the tongue is thegrossest kind of ignorance. A human being has no need to kill animalsbecause God has supplied so many nice things. If one indulges in meat-eating anyway, it is to be understood that he is acting in ignoranceand is making his future very dark. Of all kinds of animal killing, thekilling of cows is most vicious because the cow gives us all kinds ofpleasure by supplying milk. Cow slaughter is an act of the grossesttype of ignorance. In the Vedic literature (Rg Veda 9.4.64) the wordsgobhih prinita-matsaram indicate that one who, being fully satisfied bymilk, is desirous of killing the cow is, in the grossest ignorance.There is also a prayer in the Vedic literature that states:
namo brahmanya-devaya
go-brahmana-hitaya cajagad-dhitaya krsnayagovindaya namo namah
"My Lord, You are the well-wisher of the cows and the brahmanas, and
You are the well-wisher of the entire human society and world." (VisnuPurana 1.19.65) The purport is that special mention is given in thatprayer for the protection of the cows and the brahmanas. Brahmanas arethe symbol of spiritual education, and cows are the symbol of the mostvaluable food; these two living creatures, the brahmanas and the cows,must be given all protection--that is real advancement of civilization.In modern human society, spiritual knowledge is neglected, and cowkilling is encouraged. It is to be understood, then, that human society
is advancing in the wrong direction and is clearing the path to its own
condemnation. A civilization which guides the citizens to becomeanimals in their next lives is certainly not a human civilization. Thepresent human civilization is, of course, grossly misled by the modesof passion and ignorance. It is a very dangerous age, and all nationsshould take care to provide the easiest process, Krsna consciousness,to save humanity from the greatest danger.
TEXT 17
sattvat sanjayate jnanam
rajaso lobha eva capramada-mohau tamasobhavato 'jnanam eva ca
SYNONYMSsattvat--from the mode of goodness; sanjayate--develops; jnanam--
knowledge; rajasah--from the mode of passion; lobhah--greed; eva--certainly; ca--also; pramada--madness; mohau--illusion; tamasah--fromthe mode of ignorance; bhavatah--develops; ajnanam--nonsense; eva--certainly; ca--also.
TRANSLATIONFrom the mode of goodness, real knowledge develops; from the mode of
passion, greed develops; and from the mode of ignorance developfoolishness, madness and illusion.
PURPORTSince the present civilization is not very congenial to the living
entities, Krsna consciousness is recommended. Through Krsnaconsciousness, society will develop the mode of goodness. When the modeof goodness is developed, people will see things as they are. In themode of ignorance, people are just like animals and cannot see thingsclearly. In the mode of ignorance, for example, they do not see that bykilling one animal they are taking a chance of being killed by the sameanimal in the next life. Because people have no education in actualknowledge, they become irresponsible. To stop this irresponsibility,education for developing the mode of goodness of the people in generalmust be there. When they are actually educated in the mode of goodness,they will become sober, in full knowledge of things as they are. Thenpeople will be happy and prosperous. Even if the majority of the peoplearen't happy and prosperous, if a certain percentage of the populationdevelops Krsna consciousness and becomes situated in the mode ofgoodness, then there is the possibility for peace and prosperity allover the world. Otherwise, if the world is devoted to the modes ofpassion and ignorance, there can be no peace or prosperity. In the modeof passion, people become greedy, and their hankering for senseenjoyment has no limit. One can see that even if one has enough moneyand adequate arrangement for sense gratification, there is neitherhappiness nor peace of mind. That is not possible because one issituated in the mode of passion. If one wants happiness at all, hismoney will not help him; he has to elevate himself to the mode ofgoodness by practicing Krsna consciousness. One engaged in the mode ofpassion is not only mentally unhappy, but his profession and occupationare also very troublesome. He has to devise so many plans and schemes
to acquire enough money to maintain his status quo. This is all
miserable. In the mode of ignorance, people become mad. Beingdistressed by their circumstances, they take shelter of intoxication,and thus they sink further into ignorance. Their future in life is verydark.
TEXT 18
urdhvam gacchanti sattva-stha
madhye tisthanti rajasahjaghanya-guna-vrtti-sthaadho gacchanti tamasah
SYNONYMSurdhvam--upwards; gacchanti--go; sattva-sthah--one who is situated in
the mode of goodness; madhye--in the middle; tisthanti--dwell; rajasah--those who are situated in the mode of passion; jaghanya--abominable;guna--quality; vrtti-sthah--occupation; adhah--down; gacchanti--go;tamasah--people in the mode of ignorance.
TRANSLATIONThose situated in the mode of goodness gradually go upward to the
higher planets; those in the mode of passion live on the earthlyplanets; and those in the mode of ignorance go down to the hellishworlds.
PURPORTIn this verse the results of actions in the three modes of nature are
more explicitly set forth. There is an upper planetary system,consisting of the heavenly planets, where everyone is highly elevated.According to the degree of development of the mode of goodness, theliving entity can be transferred to various planets in this system. Thehighest planet is Satyaloka, or Brahmaloka, where the prime person ofthis universe, Lord Brahma, resides. We have seen already that we canhardly calculate the wondrous condition of life in Brahmaloka, but thehighest condition of life, the mode of goodness, can bring us to this.The mode of passion is mixed. It is in the middle, between the modes ofgoodness and ignorance. A person is not always pure, but even if heshould be purely in the mode of passion, he will simply remain on thisearth as a king or a rich man. But because there are mixtures, one canalso go down. People on this earth, in the mode of passion orignorance, cannot forcibly approach the higher planets by machine. Inthe mode of passion, there is also the chance of becoming mad in thenext life.The lowest quality, the mode of ignorance, is described here asabominable. The result of developing ignorance is very, very risky. Itis the lowest quality in material nature. Beneath the human level thereare eight million species of life: birds, beasts, reptiles, trees,etc., and, according to the development of the mode of ignorance,people are brought down to these abominable conditions. The wordtamasah is very significant here. Tamasah indicates those who staycontinually in the mode of ignorance without rising to a higher mode.Their future is very dark.There is an opportunity for men in the modes of ignorance and passionto be elevated to the mode of goodness, and that system is called Krsna
consciousness. But one who does not take advantage of this opportunity
will certainly continue in the lower modes.
TEXT 19
nanyam gunebhyah kartaram
yada drastanupasyatigunebhyas ca param vettimad-bhavam so 'dhigacchati
SYNONYMSna--never; anyam--other than; gunebhyah--from the qualities; kartaram--
the performer; yada--when; drasta anupasyati--he who sees properly;gunebhyah ca--from the modes of nature; param--transcendental; vetti--know; mat-bhavam--My spiritual nature; sah--he; adhigacchati--ispromoted.
TRANSLATIONWhen you see that there is nothing beyond these modes of nature in all
activities and that the Supreme Lord is transcendental to all thesemodes, then you can know My spiritual nature.
PURPORTOne can transcend all the activities of the modes of material nature
simply by understanding them properly by learning from the propersouls. The real spiritual master is Krsna, and He is imparting thisspiritual knowledge to Arjuna. Similarly, it is from those who arefully in Krsna consciousness that one has to learn this science ofactivities in terms of the modes of nature. Otherwise, one's life willbe misdirected. By the instruction of a bona fide spiritual master, aliving entity can know of his spiritual position, his material body,his senses, how he is entrapped, and how he is under the spell of thematerial modes of nature. He is helpless, being in the grip of thesemodes, but when he can see his real position, then he can attain to thetranscendental platform, having the scope for spiritual life. Actually,the living entity is not the performer of different activities. He isforced to act because he is situated in a particular type of body,conducted by some particular mode of material nature. Unless one hasthe help of spiritual authority, he cannot understand in what positionhe is actually situated. With the association of a bona fide spiritualmaster, he can see his real position, and, by such an understanding, hecan become fixed in full Krsna consciousness. A man in Krsnaconsciousness is not controlled by the spell of the material modes ofnature. It has already been stated in the Seventh Chapter that one whohas surrendered to Krsna is relieved from the activities of materialnature. Therefore for one who is able to see things as they are, theinfluence of material nature gradually ceases.
TEXT 20
gunan etan atitya trin
dehi deha-samudbhavanjanma-mrtyu-jara-duhkhairvimukto 'mrtam asnute
SYNONYMS
gunan--qualities; etan--all these; atitya--transcending; trin--three;
dehi--embodied; deha--body; samudbhavan--produced of; janma--birth;mrtyu--death; jara--old age; duhkhaih--distresses; vimuktah--beingfreed from; amrtam--nectar; asnute--enjoys.
TRANSLATIONWhen the embodied being is able to transcend these three modes, he can
become free from birth, death, old age and their distresses and canenjoy nectar even in this life.
PURPORTHow one can stay in the transcendental position, even in this body, in
full Krsna consciousness, is explained in this verse. The Sanskrit worddehi means "embodied." Although one is within this material body, byhis advancement in spiritual knowledge he can be free from theinfluence of the modes of nature. He can enjoy the happiness ofspiritual life even in this body because, after leaving this body, heis certainly going to the spiritual sky. But even in this body he canenjoy spiritual happiness. In other words, devotional service in Krsnaconsciousness is the sign of liberation from material entanglement, andthis will be explained in the Eighteenth Chapter. When one is freedfrom the influence of the modes of material nature, he enters intodevotional service.
TEXT 21
arjuna uvaca
kair lingais trin gunan etanatito bhavati prabhokim acarah katham caitamstrin gunan ativartate
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; kaih--by which; lingaih--symptoms; trin--
three; gunan--qualities; etan--all this; atitah--having transcended;bhavati--become; prabho--my Lord; kim--what; acarah--behavior; katham--what; ca--also; etan--these; trin--three; gunan--qualities; ativartate--transcend.
TRANSLATIONArjuna inquired: O my Lord, by what symptoms is one known who is
transcendental to those modes? What is his behavior? And how does hetranscend the modes of nature?
PURPORTIn this verse, Arjuna's questions are very appropriate. He wants to
know the symptoms of a person who has already transcended the materialmodes. He first inquires of the symptoms of such a transcendentalperson. How can one understand that he has already transcended theinfluence of the modes of material nature? The second question asks howhe lives and what his activities are. Are they regulated or
nonregulated? Then Arjuna inquires of the means by which he can attain
the transcendental nature. That is very important. Unless one knows thedirect means by which one can be situated always transcendentally,there is no possibility of showing the symptoms. So all these questionsput by Arjuna are very important, and the Lord answers them.
TEXTS 22-25
sri-bhagavan uvaca
prakasam ca pravrttim camoham eva ca pandavana dvesti sampravrttanina nivrttani kanksati
udasina-vad asino
gunair yo na vicalyateguna vartanta ity evamyo 'vatisthati nengate
sama-duhkha-sukhah sva-sthah
sama-lostasma-kancanahtulya-priyapriyo dhirastulya-nindatma-samstutih
manapamanayos tulyas
tulyo mitrari-paksayohsarvarambha-parityagigunatitah sa ucyate
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; prakasam
ca--and illumination; pravrttim ca--and attachment; moham--illusion;eva ca--also; pandava--O son of Pandu; na dvesti--does not hate;sampravrttani--although developed; na nivrttani--nor stop development;kanksati--desires; udasina-vat--as if neutral; asinah--situated;gunaih--by the qualities; yah--one who; na--never; vicalyate--isagitated; gunah--the qualities; vartante--is situated; iti evam--knowing thus; yah--one who; avatisthati--remains; na--never; ingate--flickering; sama--equal; duhkha--in distress; sukhah--in happiness;sva-sthah--being situated himself; sama--equally; losta--a lump ofearth; asma--stone; kancanah--gold; tulya--equally disposed; priya--dear; apriyah--undesirable; dhirah--steady; tulya--equally; ninda--indefamation; atma-samstutih--in praise of himself; mana--in honor;apamanayoh--dishonor; tulyah--equally; tulyah--equally; mitra--friend;ari--enemy; paksayoh--in parties; sarva--all; arambha--endeavor;parityagi--renouncer; guna-atitah--transcendental to the material modesof nature; sah--he; ucyate--is said to be.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: He who does not hate illumination, attachment
and delusion when they are present, nor longs for them when theydisappear; who is seated like one unconcerned, being situated beyondthese material reactions of the modes of nature, who remains firm,knowing that the modes alone are active; who regards alike pleasure andpain, and looks on a lump of earth, a stone and a piece of gold with anequal eye; who is wise and holds praise and blame to be the same; who
is unchanged in honor and dishonor, who treats friend and foe alike,
who has abandoned all fruitive undertakings--such a man is said to havetranscended the modes of nature.
PURPORTArjuna submitted three different questions, and the Lord answers them
one after another. In these verses, Krsna first indicates that a persontranscendentally situated neither envies anyone nor hankers foranything. When a living entity stays in this material world embodied bythe material body, it is to be understood that he is under the controlof one of the three modes of material nature. When he is actually outof the body, then he is out of the clutches of the material modes ofnature. But as long as he is not out of the material body, he should beneutral. He should engage himself in the devotional service of the Lordso that his identity with the material body will automatically beforgotten. When one is conscious of the material body, he acts only forsense gratification, but when one transfers the consciousness to Krsna,sense gratification automatically stops. One does not need thismaterial body, and he does not need to accept the dictations of thematerial body. The qualities of the material modes in the body willact, but as spirit soul the self is aloof from such activities. Howdoes he become aloof? He does not desire to enjoy the body, nor does hedesire to get out of it. Thus transcendentally situated, the devoteebecomes automatically free. He need not try to become free from theinfluence of the modes of material nature.The next question concerns the dealings of a transcendentally situatedperson. The materially situated person is affected by so-called honorand dishonor offered to the body, but the transcendentally situatedperson is not affected by such false honor and dishonor. He performshis duty in Krsna consciousness and does not mind whether a man honorsor dishonors him. He accepts things that are favorable for his duty inKrsna consciousness, otherwise he has no necessity of anythingmaterial, either a stone or gold. He takes everyone as his dear friendwho helps him in his execution of Krsna consciousness, and he does nothate his so-called enemy. He is equally disposed and sees everything onan equal level because he knows perfectly well that he has nothing todo with material existence. Social and political issues do not affecthim because he knows the situation of temporary upheavals anddisturbances. He does not attempt anything for his own sake. He canattempt anything for Krsna, but for his personal self he does notattempt anything. By such behavior one becomes actuallytranscendentally situated.
TEXT 26
mam ca yo 'vyabhicarena
bhakti-yogena sevatesa gunan samatityaitanbrahma-bhuyaya kalpate
SYNONYMSmam--unto Me; ca--also; yah--person; avyabhicarena--without fail;
bhakti-yogena--by devotional service; sevate--renders service; sah--he;gunan--all the modes of material nature; samatitya--transcending; etan--all this; brahma-bhuyaya--to be elevated to the Brahman platform;kalpate--is considered.
TRANSLATION
One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in
any circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature andthus comes to the level of Brahman.
PURPORTThis verse is a reply to Arjuna's third question: What is the means of
attaining to the transcendental position? As explained before, thematerial world is acting under the spell of the modes of materialnature. One should not be disturbed by the activities of the modes ofnature; instead of putting his consciousness into such activities, hemay transfer his consciousness to Krsna activities. Krsna activitiesare known as bhakti-yoga--always acting for Krsna. This includes notonly Krsna, but His different plenary expansions such as Rama andNarayana. He has innumerable expansions. One who is engaged in theservice of any of the forms of Krsna, or of His plenary expansions, isconsidered to be transcendentally situated. One should also note thatall the forms of Krsna are fully transcendental, blissful, full ofknowledge and eternal. Such personalities of Godhead are omnipotent andomniscient, and they possess all transcendental qualities. So, if oneengages himself in the service of Krsna or His plenary expansions withunfailing determination, although these modes of material nature arevery difficult to overcome, he can overcome them easily. This hasalready been explained in the Seventh Chapter. One who surrenders untoKrsna at once surmounts the influence of the modes of material nature.To be in Krsna consciousness or in devotional service means to acquireequality with Krsna. The Lord says that His nature is eternal, blissfuland full of knowledge, and the living entities are part and parcel ofthe Supreme, as gold particles are part of a gold mine. Thus the livingentity's spiritual position is as good as gold, as good as Krsna inquality. The difference of individuality continues, otherwise there isno question of bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga means that the Lord is there,the devotee is there and the activity of exchange of love between theLord and the devotee is there. Therefore the individuality of twopersons is present in the Supreme Personality of Godhead and theindividual person, otherwise there would be no meaning to bhakti-yoga.If one is not situated in the same transcendental position with theLord, one cannot serve the Supreme Lord. To be a personal assistant toa king, one must acquire the qualifications. Thus the qualification isto become Brahman, or freed from all material contamination. It is saidin the Vedic literature, brahmaiva san brahmapy eti. One can attain theSupreme Brahman by becoming Brahman. This means that one mustqualitatively become one with Brahman. By attainment of Brahman, onedoes not lose his eternal Brahman identity as an individual soul.
TEXT 27
brahmano hi pratisthaham
amrtasyavyayasya casasvatasya ca dharmasyasukhasyaikantikasya ca
SYNONYMS
brahmanah--of the impersonal brahmajyoti; hi--certainly; pratistha--the
rest; aham--I am; amrtasya--of the immortal; avyayasya--of theimperishable; ca--also; sasvatasya--of the eternal; ca--and; dharmasya--of the constitutional position; sukhasya--happiness; aikantikasya--ultimate; ca--also.
TRANSLATIONAnd I am the basis of impersonal Brahman, which is the constitutional
position of ultimate happiness, and which is immortal, imperishable andeternal.
PURPORTThe constitution of Brahman is immortality, imperishability, eternity,
and happiness. Brahman is the beginning of transcendental realization.Paramatma, the Supersoul, is the middle, the second stage intranscendental realization, and the Supreme Personality of Godhead isthe ultimate realization of the Absolute Truth. Therefore, bothParamatma and the impersonal Brahman are within the Supreme Person. Itis explained in the Seventh Chapter that material nature is themanifestation of the inferior energy of the Supreme Lord. The Lordimpregnates the inferior material nature with fragments of the superiornature, and that is the spiritual touch in the material nature. When aliving entity conditioned by this material nature begins thecultivation of spiritual knowledge, he elevates himself from theposition of material existence and gradually rises up to the Brahmanconception of the Supreme. This attainment of the Brahman conception oflife is the first stage in self-realization. At this stage the Brahman-realized person is transcendental to the material position, but he isnot actually perfect in Brahman realization. If he wants, he cancontinue to stay in the Brahman position and then gradually rise up toParamatma realization and then to the realization of the SupremePersonality of Godhead. There are many examples of this in Vedicliterature. The four Kumaras were situated first in the impersonalBrahman conception of truth, but then they gradually rose to theplatform of devotional service. One who cannot elevate himself beyondthe impersonal conception of Brahman runs the risk of falling down. InSrimad-Bhagavatam it is stated that although a person may rise to thestage of impersonal Brahman, without going further, with no informationof the Supreme Person, his intelligence is not perfectly clear.Therefore, in spite of being raised to the Brahman platform, there isthe chance of falling down if one is not engaged in the devotionalservice of the Lord. In the Vedic language it is also said, raso vaisah, rasam hy evayam labdhvanandi bhavati: "When one understands thePersonality of Godhead, the reservoir of pleasure, Krsna, he actuallybecomes transcendentally blissful." (Taittiriya Upanisad 2.7.1) TheSupreme Lord is full in six opulences, and when a devotee approachesHim, there is an exchange of these six opulences. The servant of theking enjoys on an almost equal level with the king. And so, eternalhappiness, imperishable happiness, and eternal life accompanydevotional service. Therefore, realization of Brahman, or eternity, orimperishability is included in devotional service. This is alreadypossessed by a person who is engaged in devotional service.The living entity, although Brahman by nature, has the desire to lordit over the material world, and due to this he falls down. In hisconstitutional position, a living entity is above the three modes ofmaterial nature, but association with material nature entangles him in
the different modes of material nature, goodness, passion and
ignorance. Due to the association of these three modes, his desire todominate the material world is there. By engagement in devotionalservice in full Krsna consciousness, he is immediately situated in thetranscendental position, and his unlawful desire to control materialnature is removed. Therefore the process of devotional service beginswith hearing, chanting, remembering--the prescribed nine methods forrealizing devotional service--should be practiced in the association ofdevotees. Gradually, by such association, by the influence of thespiritual master, one's material desire to dominate is removed, and onebecomes firmly situated in the Lord's transcendental loving service.This method is prescribed from the twenty-second to the last verse ofthis chapter. Devotional service to the Lord is very simple: one shouldalways engage in the service of the Lord, should eat the remnants offoodstuffs offered to the Deity, smell the flowers offered to the lotusfeet of the Lord, see the places where the Lord had His transcendentalpastimes, read of the different activities of the Lord, Hisreciprocation of love with His devotees, chant always thetranscendental vibration Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, HareHare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, and observe thefasting days commemorating the appearances and disappearances of theLord and His devotees. By following such a process one becomescompletely detached from all material activities. One who can thussituate himself in the brahma-jyoti is equal to the Supreme Personalityof Godhead in quality.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Fourteenth Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of the Three Modes of MaterialNature.
Chapter 15
The Yoga of the Supreme Person
TEXT 1
sri-bhagavan uvaca
urdhva-mulam adhah-sakhamasvattham prahur avyayamchandamsi yasya parnaniyas tam veda sa veda-vit
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; urdhva-
mulam--with roots above; adhah--downwards; sakham--branches; asvattham--banyan tree; prahuh--said; avyayam--eternal; chandamsi--Vedic hymns;yasya--of which; parnani--the leaves; yah--anyone; tam--that; veda--knows; sah--he; veda-vit--the knower of the Vedas.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: There is a banyan tree which has its roots
upward and its branches down and whose leaves are the Vedic hymns. Onewho knows this tree is the knower of the Vedas.
PURPORT
After the discussion of the importance of bhakti-yoga, one may
question, "What about the Vedas?" It is explained in this chapter thatthe purpose of Vedic study is to understand Krsna. Therefore one who isin Krsna consciousness, who is engaged in devotional service, alreadyknows the Vedas.The entanglement of this material world is compared here to a banyantree. For one who is engaged in fruitive activities, there is no end tothe banyan tree. He wanders from one branch to another, to another, toanother. The tree of this material world has no end, and for one who isattached to this tree, there is no possibility of liberation. The Vedichymns, meant for elevating oneself, are called the leaves of this tree.This tree's roots grow upward because they begin from where Brahma islocated, the topmost planet of this universe. If one can understandthis indestructible tree of illusion, then one can get out of it.This process of extrication should be understood. In the previouschapters it has been explained that there are many processes by whichto get out of the material entanglement. And, up to the ThirteenthChapter, we have seen that devotional service to the Supreme Lord isthe best way. Now, the basic principle of devotional service isdetachment from material activities and attachment to thetranscendental service of the Lord. The process of breaking attachmentto the material world is discussed in the beginning of this chapter.The root of this material existence grows upward. This means that itbegins from the total material substance, from the topmost planet ofthe universe. From there, the whole universe is expanded, with so manybranches, representing the various planetary systems. The fruitsrepresent the results of the living entities' activities, namely,religion, economic development, sense gratification and liberation.Now, there is no ready experience in this world of a tree situated withits branches down and its roots upward, but there is such a thing. Thattree can be found beside a reservoir of water. We can see that thetrees on the bank reflect upon the water with their branches down androots up. In other words, the tree of this material world is only areflection of the real tree of the spiritual world. This reflection ofthe spiritual world is situated on desire, just as a tree's reflectionis situated on water. Desire is the cause of things being situated inthis reflected material light. One who wants to get out of thismaterial existence must know this tree thoroughly through analyticalstudy. Then he can cut off his relationship with it.This tree, being the reflection of the real tree, is an exact replica.Everything is there in the spiritual world. The impersonalists takeBrahma to be the root of this material tree, and from the root,according to Sankhya philosophy, come prakrti, purusa, then the threegunas, then the five gross elements (panca-maha-bhuta), then the tensenses (dasendriya), mind, etc. In this way they divide up the wholematerial world into twenty-four elements. If Brahma is the center ofall manifestations, then this material world is a manifestation of thecenter by 180 degrees, and the other 180 degrees constitute thespiritual world. The material world is the perverted reflection, so thespiritual world must have the same variegatedness, but in reality. Theprakrti is the external energy of the Supreme Lord, and the purusa isthe Supreme Lord Himself, and that is explained in Bhagavad-gita. Sincethis manifestation is material, it is temporary. A reflection istemporary, for it is sometimes seen and sometimes not seen. But theorigin from whence the reflection is reflected is eternal. The materialreflection of the real tree has to be cut off. When it is said that aperson knows the Vedas, it is assumed that he knows how to cut offattachment to this material world. If one knows that process, he
actually knows the Vedas. One who is attracted by the ritualistic
formulas of the Vedas is attracted by the beautiful green leaves of thetree. He does not exactly know the purpose of the Vedas. The purpose ofthe Vedas, as disclosed by the Personality of Godhead Himself, is tocut down this reflected tree and attain the real tree of the spiritualworld.
TEXT 2
adhas cordhvam prasrtas tasya sakha
guna-pravrddha visaya-pravalahadhas ca mulany anusantatanikarmanubandhini manusya-loke
SYNONYMSadhah--downward; ca--and; urdhvam--upward; prasrtah--extended; tasya--
its; sakhah--branches; guna--modes of material nature; pravrddhah--developed; visaya--sense objects; pravalah--twigs; adhah--downward; ca--and; mulani--roots; anusantatani--extended; karma--according to work;anubandhini--bound; manusya-loke--in the world of human society.
TRANSLATIONThe branches of this tree extend downward and upward, nourished by the
three modes of material nature. The twigs are the objects of thesenses. This tree also has roots going down, and these are bound to thefruitive actions of human society.
PURPORTThe description of the banyan tree is further explained here. Its
branches spread in all directions. In the lower parts, there arevariegated manifestations of living entities such as human beings,animals, horses, cows, dogs, cats, etc. These are situated on the lowerparts of the branches, whereas on the upper parts are higher forms ofliving entities: the demigods, Gandharvas and many other higher speciesof life. As a tree is nourished by water, so this tree is nourished bythe three modes of material nature. Sometimes we find that a tract ofland is barren for want of sufficient water, and sometimes a tract isvery green; similarly, where the modes of material nature areproportionately greater in quantity, the different species of life aremanifest in that proportion accordingly.The twigs of the tree are considered to be the sense objects. Bydevelopment of the different modes of nature, we develop differentsenses, and, by the senses, we enjoy different varieties of senseobjects. The source of the senses--the ears, the nose, eyes, etc.--isconsidered to be the upper twigs, tuned to the enjoyment of differentsense objects. The leaves are sound, form, touch--the sense objects.The roots, which are subsidiary, are the by-products of differentvarieties of suffering and sense enjoyment. Thus we develop attachmentand aversion. The tendencies toward piety and impiety are considered tobe the secondary roots, spreading in all directions. The real root isfrom Brahmaloka, and the other roots are in the human planetarysystems. After one enjoys the results of virtuous activities in theupper planetary systems, he comes down to this earth and renews hiskarma, or fruitive activities for promotion. This planet of humanbeings is considered the field of activities.
TEXTS 3-4
na rupam asyeha tathopalabhyate
nanto na cadir na ca sampratisthaasvattham enam su-virudha-mulamasanga-sastrena drdhena chittva
tatah padam tat parimargitavyam
yasmin gata na nivartanti bhuyahtam eva cadyam purusam prapadyeyatah pravrttih prasrta purani
SYNONYMSna--not; rupam--form; asya--of this tree; iha--in this; tatha--also;
upalabhyate--can be perceived; na--never; antah--end; na--never; ca--also; adih--beginning; na--never; ca--also; sampratistha--thefoundation; asvattham--banyan tree; enam--this; su-virudha--strongly;mulam--rooted; asanga-sastrena--by the weapon of detachment; drdhena--strong; chittva--by cutting; tatah--thereafter; padam--situation; tat--that; parimargitavyam--has to be searched out; yasmin--where; gatah--going; na--never; nivartanti--comes back; bhuyah--again; tam--to Him;eva--certainly; ca--also; adyam--original; purusam--the Personality ofGodhead; prapadye--surrender; yatah--from whom; pravrttih--beginning;prasrta--extended; purani--very old.
TRANSLATIONThe real form of this tree cannot be perceived in this world. No one
can understand where it ends, where it begins, or where its foundationis. But with determination one must cut down this tree with the weaponof detachment. So doing, one must seek that place from which, havingonce gone, one never returns, and there surrender to that SupremePersonality of Godhead from whom everything has began and in whomeverything is abiding since time immemorial.
PURPORTIt is now clearly stated that the real form of this banyan tree cannot
be understood in this material world. Since the root is upwards, theextension of the real tree is at the other end. No one can see how farthe tree extends, nor can one see the beginning of this tree. Yet onehas to find out the cause. "I am the son of my father, my father is theson of such and such a person, etc." By searching in this way, onecomes to Brahma, who is generated by the Garbhodakasayi Visnu. Finally,in this way, when one reaches the Supreme Personality of Godhead, thatis the end of research work. One has to search out the origin of thistree, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, through the association ofpersons who are in knowledge of that Supreme Personality of Godhead.Then by understanding one becomes gradually detached from this falsereflection of reality, and by knowledge one can cut off the connectionand actually become situated in the real tree.The word asanga is very important in this connection because theattachment for sense enjoyment and lording it over material nature isvery strong. Therefore one must learn detachment by discussion ofspiritual science based on authoritative scriptures, and one must hearfrom persons who are actually in knowledge. As a result of such
discussion in the association of devotees, one comes to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Then the first thing one must do is surrenderto Him. The description of that place whence going no one returns tothis false reflected tree is given here. The Supreme Personality ofGodhead, Krsna, is the original root from whom everything has emanated.To gain favor of that Personality of Godhead, one has only tosurrender, and this is a result of performing devotional service byhearing, chanting, etc. He is the cause of this extension of thematerial world. This has already been explained by the Lord Himself:aham sarvasya prabhavah, "I am the origin of everything." Therefore toget out of the entanglement of this strong banyan tree of materiallife, one must surrender to Krsna. As soon as one surrenders untoKrsna, he becomes detached automatically from this material extension.
TEXT 5
nirmana-moha jita-sanga-dosa
adhyatma-nitya vinivrtta-kamahdvandvair vimuktah sukha-duhkha-samjnairgacchanty amudhah padam avyayam tat
SYNONYMSnih--without; mana--respect; mohah--illusion; jita--having conquered;
sanga--association; dosah--faulty; adhyatma--spiritual; nityah--eternity; vinivrtta--associated; kamah--lust; dvandvaih--with duality;vimuktah--liberated; sukha-duhkha--happiness and distress; samjnaih--named; gacchanti--attains; amudhah--unbewildered; padam--situation;avyayam--eternal; tat--that.
TRANSLATIONOne who is free from illusion, false prestige, and false association,
who understands the eternal, who is done with material lust and isfreed from the duality of happiness and distress, and who knows how tosurrender unto the Supreme Person, attains to that eternal kingdom.
PURPORTThe surrendering process is described here very nicely. The first
qualification is that one should not be deluded by pride. Because theconditioned soul is puffed up, thinking himself the lord of materialnature, it is very difficult for him to surrender unto the SupremePersonality of Godhead. One should know by the cultivation of realknowledge that he is not lord of material nature; the SupremePersonality of Godhead is the Lord. When one is free from delusioncaused by pride, he can begin the process of surrender. For one who isalways expecting some honor in this material world, it is not possibleto surrender to the Supreme Person. Pride is due to illusion, foralthough one comes here, stays for a brief time and then goes away, hehas the foolish notion that he is the lord of the world. He thus makesall things complicated, and he is always in trouble. The whole worldmoves under this impression. People are considering that the land, thisearth, belongs to human society, and they have divided the land underthe false impression that they are the proprietors. One has to get outof this false notion that human society is the proprietor of thisworld. When one is freed from such a false notion, he becomes free fromall the false associations caused by familial, social and national
affections. These faulty associations bind one to this material world.
After this stage, one has to develop spiritual knowledge. One has tocultivate knowledge of what is actually his own and what is actuallynot his own. And, when one has an understanding of things as they are,he becomes free from all dual conceptions such as happiness anddistress, pleasure and pain. He becomes full in knowledge; then it ispossible for him to surrender to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 6
na tad bhasayate suryo
na sasanko na pavakahyad gatva na nivartantetad dhama paramam mama
SYNONYMSna--not; tat--that; bhasayate--illuminates; suryah--the sun; na--nor;
sasankah--the moon; na--nor; pavakah--fire, electricity; yat--where;gatva--going; na--never; nivartante--comes back; tat dhama--that abode;paramam--supreme; mama--My.
TRANSLATIONThat abode of Mine is not illumined by the sun or moon, nor by
electricity. One who reaches it never returns to this material world.
PURPORTThe spiritual world, the abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Krsna--which is known as Krsnaloka, Goloka Vrndavana--is describedhere. In the spiritual sky there is no need of sunshine, moonshine,fire or electricity, because all the planets are self-luminous. We haveonly one planet in this universe, the sun, which is self-luminous, butall the planets in the spiritual sky are self-luminous. The shiningeffulgence of all those planets (called Vaikunthas) constitutes theshining sky known as the brahmajyoti. Actually, the effulgence isemanating from the planet of Krsna, Goloka Vrndavana. Part of thatshining effulgence is covered by the mahat-tattva, the material world.Other than this, the major portion of that shining sky is full ofspiritual planets, which are called Vaikunthas, chief of which isGoloka Vrndavana.As long as a living entity is in this dark material world, he is inconditional life, but as soon as he reaches the spiritual sky bycutting through the false, perverted tree of this material world, hebecomes liberated. Then there is no chance of his coming back here. Inhis conditional life, the living entity considers himself to be thelord of this material world, but in his liberated state he enters intothe spiritual kingdom and becomes an associate of the Supreme Lord.There he enjoys eternal bliss, eternal life, and full knowledge.One should be captivated by this information. He should desire totransfer himself to that eternal world and extricate himself from thisfalse reflection of reality. For one who is too much attached to thismaterial world, it is very difficult to cut that attachment, but if hetakes to Krsna consciousness, there is a chance of gradually becomingdetached. One has to associate himself with devotees, those who are inKrsna consciousness. One should search out a society dedicated to Krsnaconsciousness and learn how to discharge devotional service. In this
way he can cut off his attachment to the material world. One cannot
become detached from the attraction of the material world simply bydressing himself in saffron cloth. He must become attached to thedevotional service of the Lord. Therefore one should take it veryseriously that devotional service as described in the Twelfth Chapteris the only way to get out of this false representation of the realtree. In Chapter Fourteen the contamination of all kinds of processesby material nature is described. Only devotional service is describedas purely transcendental.The words paramam mama are very important here. Actually every nook andcorner is the property of the Supreme Lord, but the spiritual world isparamam, full of six opulences. The Katha Upanisad (2.2.15) alsoconfirms that in the spiritual world there is no need of sunshine ormoonshine (na tatra suryo bhati na candratarakam), for the wholespiritual sky is illuminated by the internal potency of the SupremeLord. That supreme abode can be achieved only by surrender and by noother means.
TEXT 7
mamaivamso jiva-loke
jiva-bhutah sanatanahmanah-sasthanindriyaniprakrti-sthani karsati
SYNONYMSmama--My; eva--certainly; amsah--fragmental particles; jiva-loke--world
of conditional life; jiva-bhutah--the conditioned living entity;sanatanah--eternal; manah--mind; sasthani--six; indriyani--senses;prakrti--material nature; sthani--situated; karsati--struggling hard.
TRANSLATIONThe living entities in this conditioned world are My eternal fragmental
parts. Due to conditioned life, they are struggling very hard with thesix senses, which include the mind.
PURPORTIn this verse the identity of the living being is clearly given. The
living entity is the fragmental part and parcel of the Supreme Lord--eternally. It is not that he assumes individuality in his conditionallife and in his liberated state becomes one with the Supreme Lord. Heis eternally fragmented. It is clearly said, sanatanah. According tothe Vedic version, the Supreme Lord manifests and expands Himself ininnumerable expansions, of which the primary expansions are calledvisnu-tattva and the secondary expansions are called the livingentities. In other words, the visnu-tattva is the personal expansion,and the living entities are separated expansions. By His personalexpansion, He is manifested in various forms like Lord Rama,Nrsimhadeva, Visnumurti and all the predominating Deities in theVaikuntha planets. The separated expansions, the living entities, areeternally servitors. The personal expansions of the Supreme Personalityof Godhead, the individual identities of the Godhead, are alwayspresent. Similarly, the separated expansions of the living entitieshave their identities. As fragmental parts and parcels of the SupremeLord, the living entities also have fragmental portions of His
qualities, of which independence is one. Every living entity, as an
individual soul, has his personal individuality and a minute form ofindependence. By misuse of that independence one becomes a conditionedsoul, and by proper use of independence he is always liberated. Ineither case, he is qualitatively eternal, as the Supreme Lord is. Inhis liberated state he is freed from this material condition, and he isunder the engagement of transcendental service unto the Lord; in hisconditioned life he is dominated by the material modes of nature, andhe forgets the transcendental loving service of the Lord. As a result,he has to struggle very hard to maintain his existence in the materialworld.The living entities, not only the human beings and the cats and dogs,but even the greater controllers of the material world--Brahma, LordSiva and even Visnu--are all parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord.They are all eternal, not temporary manifestations. The word karsati(struggling or grappling hard) is very significant. The conditionedsoul is bound up, as though shackled by iron chains. He is bound up bythe false ego, and the mind is the chief agent which is driving him inthis material existence. When the mind is in the mode of goodness, hisactivities are good; when the mind is in the mode of passion, hisactivities are troublesome; and when the mind is in the mode ofignorance, he travels in the lower species of life. It is clear,however, in this verse, that the conditioned soul is covered by thematerial body, with the mind and the senses, and when he is liberatedthis material covering perishes, but his spiritual body manifests itsindividual capacity. The following information is there in theMadhyandinayana-sruti: sa va esa brahma-nistha idam sariram martyamatisrjya brahmabhisampadya brahmana pasyati brahmana srnotibrahmanaivedam sarvam anubhavati. It is stated here that when a livingentity gives up this material embodiment and enters into the spiritualworld, he revives his spiritual body, and in his spiritual body he cansee the Supreme Personality of Godhead face to face. He can hear andspeak to Him face to face, and he can understand the SupremePersonality as He is. In smrti also it is understood, vasanti yatrapurusah sarve vaikuntha-murtayah: in the spiritual planets everyonelives in bodies featured like the Supreme Personality of Godhead's. Asfar as bodily construction is concerned, there is no difference betweenthe part and parcel living entities and the expansions of visnu-murti.In other words, at liberation the living entity gets a spiritual bodyby the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.The word mamaivamsah (fragmental parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord)is also very significant. The fragmental portion of the Supreme Lord isnot like some material broken part. We have already understood in theSecond Chapter that the spirit cannot be cut into pieces. This fragmentis not materially conceived. It is not like matter, which can be cutinto pieces and joined together again. That conception is notapplicable here, because the Sanskrit word sanatana (eternal) is used.The fragmental portion is eternal. It is also stated in the beginningof the Second Chapter that (dehino 'smin yatha dehe) in each and everyindividual body the fragmental portion of the Supreme Lord is present.That fragmental portion, when liberated from the bodily entanglement,revives its original spiritual body in the spiritual sky in a spiritualplanet and enjoys association with the Supreme Lord. It is, however,understood here that the living entity, being the fragmental part andparcel of the Supreme Lord, is qualitatively one with the Lord, just asthe parts and parcels of gold are also gold.
TEXT 8
sariram yad avapnoti
yac capy utkramatisvarahgrhitvaitani samyativayur gandhan ivasayat
SYNONYMSsariram--body; yat--as much as; avapnoti--gets; yat--that which; ca--
also; api--virtually; utkramati--gives up; isvarah--the lord of thebody; grhitva--taking; etani--all these; samyati--goes away; vayuh--air; gandhan--smell; iva--like; asayat--from the flower.
TRANSLATIONThe living entity in the material world carries his different
conceptions of life from one body to another as the air carries aromas.
PURPORTHere the living entity is described as isvara, the controller of his
own body. If he likes, he can change his body to a higher grade, and ifhe likes he can move to a lower class. Minute independence is there.The change his body undergoes depends upon him. At the time of death,the consciousness he has created will carry him on to the next type ofbody. If he has made his consciousness like that of a cat or dog, he issure to change to a cat's or dog's body. And, if he has fixed hisconsciousness on godly qualities, he will change into the form of ademigod. And, if he is in Krsna consciousness, he will be transferredto Krsnaloka in the spiritual world and will associate with Krsna. Itis a false claim that after the annihilation of this body everything isfinished. The individual soul is transmigrating from one body toanother, and his present body and present activities are the backgroundof his next body. One gets a different body according to karma, and hehas to quit this body in due course. It is stated here that the subtlebody, which carries the conception of the next body, develops anotherbody in the next life. This process of transmigrating from one body toanother and struggling while in the body is called karsati or strugglefor existence.
TEXT 9
srotram caksuh sparsanam ca
rasanam ghranam eva caadhisthaya manas cayamvisayan upasevate
SYNONYMSsrotram--ears; caksuh--eyes; sparsanam--touch; ca--also; rasanam--
tongue; ghranam--smelling power; eva--also; ca--and; adhisthaya--beingsituated; manah--mind; ca--also; ayam--this; visayan--sense objects;upasevate--enjoys.
TRANSLATION
The living entity, thus taking another gross body, obtains a certain
type of ear, tongue, eye, nose and sense of touch, which are groupedabout the mind. He thus enjoys a particular set of sense objects.
PURPORTIn other words, if the living entity adulterates his consciousness with
the qualities of cats and dogs, in his next life he gets a cat or dogbody and enjoys. Consciousness is originally pure, like water. But ifwe mix water with a certain color, it changes. Similarly, consciousnessis pure, for the spirit soul is pure. But consciousness is changedaccording to the association of the material qualities. Realconsciousness is Krsna consciousness. When, therefore, one is situatedin Krsna consciousness, he is in his pure life. But if hisconsciousness is adulterated by some type of material mentality, in thenext life he gets a corresponding body. He does not necessarily get ahuman body again; he can get the body of a cat, dog, hog, demigod orone of many other forms, for there are 8,400,000 species.
TEXT 10
utkramantam sthitam vapi
bhunjanam va gunanvitamvimudha nanupasyantipasyanti jnana-caksusah
SYNONYMSutkramantam--quitting the body; sthitam--situated in the body; va api--
either; bhunjanam--enjoying; va--or; guna-anvitam--under the spell ofthe modes of material nature; vimudhah--foolish persons; na--never;anupasyanti--can see; pasyanti--one can see; jnana-caksusah--one whohas the eyes of knowledge.
TRANSLATIONThe foolish cannot understand how a living entity can quit his body,
nor can they understand what sort of body he enjoys under the spell ofthe modes of nature. But one whose eyes are trained in knowledge cansee all this.
PURPORTThe word jnana-caksusah is very significant. Without knowledge, one
cannot understand how a living entity leaves his present body, nor whatform of body he is going to take in the next life, nor even why he isliving in a particular type of body. This requires a great amount ofknowledge understood from Bhagavad-gita and similar literatures heardfrom a bona fide spiritual master. One who is trained to perceive allthese things is fortunate. Every living entity is quitting his bodyunder certain circumstances; he is living under certain circumstances,and he is enjoying under certain circumstances under the spell ofmaterial nature. As a result, he is suffering different kinds ofhappiness and distress, under the illusion of sense enjoyment. Personswho are everlastingly fooled by lust and desire lose all power ofunderstand their change of body and their stay in a particular body.They cannot comprehend it. Those who have developed spiritualknowledge, however, can see that the spirit is different from the body
and is changing its body and enjoying in different ways. A person in
such knowledge can understand how the conditioned living entity issuffering in this material existence. Therefore those who are highlydeveloped in Krsna consciousness try their best to give this knowledgeto the people in general, for their conditional life is very muchtroublesome. They should come out of it and be Krsna conscious andliberate themselves to transfer to the spiritual world.
TEXT 11
yatanto yoginas cainam
pasyanty atmany avasthitamyatanto 'py akrtatmanonainam pasyanty acetasah
SYNONYMSyatantah--endeavoring; yoginah--transcendentalists; ca--also; enam--
this; pasyanti--can see; atmani--in the self; avasthitam--situated;yatantah--although endeavoring; api--although; akrta-atmanah--withoutself-realization; na--does not; enam--this; pasyanti--can see;acetasah--undeveloped mind.
TRANSLATIONThe endeavoring transcendentalist, who is situated in self-realization,
can see all this clearly. But those who are not situated in self-realization cannot see what is taking place, though they may try to.
PURPORTThere are many transcendentalists on the path of spiritual self-
realization, but one who is not situated in self-realization cannot seehow things are changing in the body of the living entity. The wordyoginah is significant in this connection. In the present day there aremany so-called yogis, and there are many so-called associations ofyogis, but they are actually blind in the matter of self-realization.They are simply addicted to some sort of gymnastic exercise and aresatisfied if the body is well-built and healthy. They have no otherinformation. They are called yatanto 'py akrtatmanah. Even though theyare endeavoring in a so-called yoga system, they are not self-realized.Such people cannot understand the process of the transmigration of thesoul. Only those who are actually in the yoga system and have realizedthe self, the world, and the Supreme Lord, in other words, the bhakti-yogis, those engaged in pure devotional service in Krsna consciousness,can understand how things are taking place.
TEXT 12
yad aditya-gatam tejo
jagad bhasayate 'khilamyac candramasi yac cagnautat tejo viddhi mamakam
SYNONYMSyat--that which; aditya-gatam--in the sunshine; tejah--splendor; jagat-
-the whole world; bhasayate--illuminates; akhilam--entirely; yat--that
which; candramasi--in the moon; yat--that which; ca--also; agnau--in
the fire; tat--that; tejah--splendor; viddhi--understand; mamakam--fromMe.
TRANSLATIONThe splendor of the sun, which dissipates the darkness of this whole
world, comes from Me. And the splendor of the moon and the splendor offire are also from Me.
PURPORTThe unintelligent cannot understand how things are taking place. The
beginning of knowledge can be established by understanding what theLord explains here. Everyone sees the sun, moon, fire and electricity.One should simply try to understand that the splendor of the sun, thesplendor of the moon, and the splendor of electricity or fire arecoming from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In such a conception oflife, the beginning of Krsna consciousness, lies a great deal ofadvancement for the conditioned soul in this material world. The livingentities are essentially the parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord, andHe is giving herewith the hint how they can come back to Godhead, backto home.From this verse we can understand that the sun is illuminating thewhole solar system. There are different universes and solar systems,and there are different suns, moons and planets also, but in eachuniverse there is only one sun. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (10.21), themoon is one of the stars (naksatranam aham sasi). Sunlight is due tothe spiritual effulgence in the spiritual sky of the Supreme Lord. Withthe rise of the sun, the activities of human beings are set up. Theyset fire to prepare their foodstuff, they set fire to start thefactories, etc. So many things are done with the help of fire.Therefore sunrise, fire and moonlight are so pleasing to the livingentities. Without their help no living entity can live. So if one canunderstand that the light and splendor of the sun, moon and fire areemanating from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, then one'sKrsna consciousness will begin. By the moonshine, all the vegetablesare nourished. The moonshine is so pleasing that people can easilyunderstand that they are living by the mercy of the Supreme Personalityof Godhead Krsna. Without His mercy there cannot be sun, without Hismercy there cannot be moon, and without His mercy there cannot be fire,and without the help of sun, moon and fire, no one can live. These aresome thoughts to provoke Krsna consciousness in the conditioned soul.
TEXT 13
gam avisya ca bhutani
dharayamy aham ojasapusnami causadhih sarvahsomo bhutva rasatmakah
SYNONYMSgam--the planets; avisya--entering; ca--also; bhutani--living entities;
dharayami--sustaining; aham--I; ojasa--by My energy; pusnami--nourishing; ca--and; ausadhih--all vegetables; sarvah--all; somah--themoon; bhutva--becoming; rasa-atmakah--supplying the juice.
TRANSLATION
I enter into each planet, and by My energy they stay in orbit. I become
the moon and thereby supply the juice of life to all vegetables.
PURPORTIt is understood that all the planets are floating in the air only by
the energy of the Lord. The Lord enters into every atom, every planet,and every living being. That is discussed in the Brahma-samhita. It issaid there that one plenary portion of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, Paramatma, enters into the planets, the universe, the livingentity, and even into the atom. So due to His entrance, everything isappropriately manifested. When the spirit soul is there, a living mancan float on the water, but when the living spark is out of the bodyand the body is dead, it sinks. Of course when it is decomposed itfloats just like straw and other things, but as soon as the man isdead, he at once sinks in the water. Similarly, all these planets arefloating in space, and this is due to the entrance of the supremeenergy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. His energy is sustainingeach planet, just like a handful of dust. If someone holds a handful ofdust, there is no possibility of the dust's falling, but if one throwsit in the air, it will fall down. Similarly, these planets, which arefloating in the air, are actually held in the fist of the universalform of the Supreme Lord. By His strength and energy, all moving andunmoving things stay in their place. It is said in the Vedic hymns thatbecause of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the sun is shining andthe planets are steadily moving. Were it not for Him, all the planetswould scatter, like dust in air, and perish. Similarly, it is due tothe Supreme Personality of Godhead that the moon nourishes allvegetables. Due to the moon's influence, the vegetables becomedelicious. Without the moonshine, the vegetables can neither grow nortaste succulent. Human society is working, living comfortably andenjoying food due to the supply from the Supreme Lord. Otherwise,mankind could not survive. The word rasatmakah is very significant.Everything becomes palatable by the agency of the Supreme Lord throughthe influence of the moon.
TEXT 14
aham vaisvanaro bhutva
praninam deham asritahpranapana-samayuktahpacamy annam catur-vidham
SYNONYMSaham--I; vaisvanarah--by My plenary portion as the digesting fire;
bhutva--becoming; praninam--of all living entities; deham--body;asritah--situated; prana--outgoing air; apana--down-going air;samayuktah--keep balance; pacami--digest; annam--foodstuff; catuh-vidham--four kinds of.
TRANSLATIONI am the fire of digestion in every living body, and I am the air of
life, outgoing and incoming, by which I digest the four kinds offoodstuff.
PURPORT
According to Ayur-vedic sastra, we understand that there is a fire in
the stomach which digests all food sent there. When the fire is notblazing, there is no hunger, and when the fire is in order we becomehungry. Sometimes when the fire is not going nicely, treatment isrequired. In any case, this fire is representative of the SupremePersonality of Godhead. Vedic mantras (Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 5.9.1)also confirm that the Supreme Lord or Brahman is situated in the formof fire within the stomach and is digesting all kinds of foodstuff(ayam agnir vaisvanaro yo 'yam antah puruse yenedam annam pacyate).Therefore since He is helping the digestion of all kinds of foodstuff,the living entity is not independent in the eating process. Unless theSupreme Lord helps him in digesting, there is no possibility of eating.He thus produces and digests foodstuff, and, by His grace, we areenjoying life. In the Vedanta-sutra (1.2.27) this is also confirmed.Sabdadibhyo 'ntah pratisthanac ca: the Lord is situated within thesound and within the body, within the air and even within the stomachas the digestive force. There are four kinds of foodstuff, some areswallowed, some are chewed, some are licked up, and some are sucked,and He is the digestive force for all of them.
TEXT 15
sarvasya caham hrdi sannivisto
mattah smrtir jnanam apohanam cavedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyovedanta-krd veda-vid eva caham
SYNONYMSsarvasya--of all living beings; ca--and; aham--I; hrdi--in the heart;
sannivistah--being situated; mattah--from Me; smrtih--remembrance;jnanam--knowledge; apohanam ca--and forgetfulness; vedaih--by theVedas; ca--also; sarvaih--all; aham--I am; eva--certainly; vedyah--knowable; vedanta-krt--the compiler of the Vedanta; veda-vit--theknower of the Vedas; eva--certainly; ca--and; aham--I.
TRANSLATIONI am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance,
knowledge and forgetfulness. By all the Vedas I am to be known; indeedI am the compiler of Vedanta, and I am the knower of the Vedas.
PURPORTThe Supreme Lord is situated as Paramatma in everyone's heart, and it
is from Him that all activities are initiated. The living entityforgets everything of his past life, but he has to act according to thedirection of the Supreme Lord, who is witness to all his work.Therefore he begins his work according to his past deeds. Requiredknowledge is supplied to him, and remembrance is given to him, and heforgets, also, about his past life. Thus, the Lord is not only all-pervading; He is also localized in every individual heart. He awardsthe different fruitive results. He is not only worshipable as theimpersonal Brahman, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and thelocalized Paramatma, but as the form of the incarnation of the Vedas as
well. The Vedas give the right direction to the people so that they can
properly mold their lives and come back to Godhead, back to home. TheVedas offer knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, andKrsna in His incarnation as Vyasadeva is the compiler of the Vedanta-sutra. The commentation on the Vedanta-sutra by Vyasadeva in theSrimad-Bhagavatam gives the real understanding of Vedanta-sutra. TheSupreme Lord is so full that for the deliverance of the conditionedsoul He is the supplier and digester of foodstuff, the witness of hisactivity, the giver of knowledge in the form of Vedas and as theSupreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, the teacher of the Bhagavad-gita. He is worshipable by the conditioned soul. Thus God is all-good;God is all-merciful.Antah-pravistah sasta jananam. The living entity forgets as soon as hequits his present body, but he begins his work again, initiated by theSupreme Lord. Although he forgets, the Lord gives him the intelligenceto renew his work where he ended in his last life. So not only does aliving entity enjoy or suffer in this world according to the dictationfrom the Supreme Lord situated locally in the heart, but he receivesthe opportunity to understand the Vedas from Him. If one is serious tounderstand the Vedic knowledge, then Krsna gives the requiredintelligence. Why does He present the Vedic knowledge forunderstanding? Because a living entity individually needs to understandKrsna. Vedic literature confirms this: yo 'sau sarvair vedair giyate.In all Vedic literature, beginning from the four Vedas, Vedanta-sutraand the Upanisads and Puranas, the glories of the Supreme Lord arecelebrated. By performing Vedic rituals, discussing the Vedicphilosophy and worshiping the Lord in devotional service, He isattained. Therefore the purpose of the Vedas is to understand Krsna.The Vedas give us direction to understand Krsna and the process ofunderstanding. The ultimate goal is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.Vedanta-sutra (1.1.4) confirms this in the following words: tat tusamanvayat. One can attain perfection by understanding Vedicliterature, and one can understand his relationship with the SupremePersonality of Godhead by performing the different processes. Thus onecan approach Him and at the end one can attain the supreme goal, who isno other than the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In this verse,however, the purpose of the Vedas, the understanding of the Vedas, andthe goal of the Vedas are clearly defined.
TEXT 16
dvav imau purusau loke
ksaras caksara eva caksarah sarvani bhutanikuta-stho 'ksara ucyate
SYNONYMSdvau--two; imau--in this (world); purusau--living entities; loke--in
the world; ksarah--fallible; ca--and; aksarah--infallible; eva--certainly; ca--and; ksarah--the fallible; sarvani--all; bhutani--livingentities; kuta-sthah--in oneness; aksarah--infallible; ucyate--is said.
TRANSLATIONThere are two classes of beings, the fallible and the infallible. In
the material world every entity is fallible, and in the spiritual worldevery entity is called infallible.
PURPORT
As already explained, the Lord in His incarnation as Vyasadeva compiled
the Vedanta-sutra. Here the Lord is giving, in summary, the contents ofthe Vedanta-sutra. He says that the living entities, who areinnumerable, can be divided into two classes--the fallible and theinfallible. The living entities are eternally separated parts andparcels of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When they are in contactwith the material world, they are called jiva-bhuta, and the Sanskritwords given here, ksarah sarvani bhutani, mean that they are fallible.Those who are in oneness with the Supreme Personality of Godhead,however, are called infallible. Oneness does not mean that they have noindividuality, but that there is no disunity. They are all agreeable tothe purpose of the creation. Of course, in the spiritual world, thereis no such thing as creation, but since the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, as stated in the Vedanta-sutra, is the source of allemanations, that conception is explained.According to the statement of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, LordKrsna, there are two classes of men. The Vedas give evidence of this,so there is no doubt about it. The living entities, who are strugglingin this world with the mind and five senses, have their material bodieswhich are changing as long as the living entities are conditioned.One's body changes due to contact with matter; matter is changing, sothe living entity appears to be changing. But in the spiritual worldthe body is not made of matter; therefore there is no change. In thematerial world the living entity undergoes six changes--birth, growth,duration, reproduction, then dwindling and vanishing. These are thechanges of the material body. But in the spiritual world the body doesnot change; there is no old age, there is no birth, there is no death.There all exists in oneness. It is more clearly explained as ksarahsarvani bhutani: any living entity who has come in contact with matter,beginning from the first created being, Brahma, down to a small ant, ischanging its body; therefore they are all fallible. In the spiritualworld, however, they are always liberated in oneness.
TEXT 17
uttamah purusas tv anyah
paramatmety udahrtahyo loka-trayam avisyabibharty avyaya isvarah
SYNONYMSuttamah--the best; purusah--personality; tu--but; anyah--another;
parama--the supreme; atma--self; iti--thus; udahrtah--is said; yah--onewho; loka--of the universe; trayam--the three divisions; avisya--entering; bibharti--maintaining; avyayah--inexhaustible; isvarah--theLord.
TRANSLATIONBesides these two, there is the greatest living personality, the Lord
Himself, who has entered into these worlds and is maintaining them.
PURPORT
This verse is very nicely expressed in the Katha Upanisad (2.2.13) and
Svetasvatara Upanisad (6.13). It is clearly stated there that above theinnumerable living entities, some of whom are conditioned and some ofwhom are liberated, there is the Supreme Personality who is Paramatma.The Upanisadic verse runs as follows: nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam.The purport is that amongst all the living entities, both conditionedand liberated, there is one supreme living personality, the SupremePersonality of Godhead, who maintains them and gives them all facilityof enjoyment according to different work. That Supreme Personality ofGodhead is situated in everyone's heart as Paramatma. A wise man whocan understand Him is eligible to attain the perfect peace, not others.It is incorrect to think of the Supreme Lord and the living entities asbeing on the same level or equal in all respects. There is always thequestion of superiority and inferiority in their personalities. Thisparticular word uttama is very significant. No one can surpass theSupreme Personality of Godhead. Loke is also significant because in thepaurusa, a Vedic literature, it is stated, lokyate vedartho 'nena. ThisSupreme Lord in His localized aspect as Paramatma explains the purposeof the Vedas. The following verse also appears in the Vedas (ChandogyaUpanisad 8.12.3):
tavad esa samprasado 'smac
charirat samutthaya paramjyoti-rupam sampadya svenarupenabhinispadyate sa uttamah purusah.
"The Supersoul coming out of the body enters the impersonal
brahmajyoti; then in His form He remains in His spiritual identity.That Supreme is called the Supreme Personality." This means that theSupreme Personality is exhibiting and diffusing His spiritualeffulgence, which is the ultimate illumination. That SupremePersonality also has a localized aspect as Paramatma. By incarnatingHimself as the son of Satyavati and Parasara, He explains the Vedicknowledge as Vyasadeva.
TEXT 18
yasmat ksaram atito 'ham
aksarad api cottamahato 'smi loke vede caprathitah purusottamah
SYNONYMSyasmat--because; ksaram--the fallible; atitah--transcendental; aham--I;
aksarat--from the infallible; api--better than that; ca--and; uttamah--the best; atah--therefore; asmi--I am; loke--in the world; vede--in theVedic literature; ca--and; prathitah--celebrated; purusa-uttamah--asthe Supreme Personality.
TRANSLATIONBecause I am transcendental, beyond both the fallible and the
infallible, and because I am the greatest, I am celebrated both in theworld and in the Vedas as that Supreme Person.
PURPORT
No one can surpass the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna--neither
the conditioned soul nor the liberated soul. He is, therefore, thegreatest of personalities. Now it is clear here that the livingentities and the Supreme Personality of Godhead are individuals. Thedifference is that the living entities, either in the conditioned stateor in the liberated state, cannot surpass in quantity the inconceivablepotencies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 19
yo mam evam asammudho
janati purusottamamsa sarva-vid bhajati mamsarva-bhavena bharata
SYNONYMSyah--anyone; mam--unto Me; evam--certainly; asammudhah--without a
doubt; janati--knows; purusa-uttamam--the Supreme Personality ofGodhead; sah--he; sarva-vit--knower of everything; bhajati--rendersdevotional service; mam--unto Me; sarva-bhavena--in all respects;bharata--O son of Bharata.
TRANSLATIONWhoever knows Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, without
doubting, is to be understood as the knower of everything, and Hetherefore engages himself in full devotional service, O son of Bharata.
PURPORTThere are many philosophical speculations about the constitutional
position of the living entities and the Supreme Absolute Truth. Now inthis verse the Supreme Personality of Godhead clearly explains thatanyone who knows Lord Krsna as the Supreme Person is actually theknower of everything. The imperfect knower goes on simply speculatingabout the Absolute Truth, but the perfect knower, without wasting hisvaluable time, engages directly in Krsna consciousness, the devotionalservice of the Supreme Lord. Throughout the whole of Bhagavad-gita,this fact is being stressed at every step. And still there are so manystubborn commentators on Bhagavad-gita who consider the SupremeAbsolute Truth and the living entities to be one and the same.The Vedic knowledge is called sruti, learning by aural reception. Oneshould actually receive the Vedic messages from authorities like Krsnaand His representatives. Here Krsna distinguishes everything verynicely, and one should hear from this source. Simply to hear like thehogs is not sufficient; one must be able to understand from theauthorities. It is not that one should simply speculate academically.One should submissively hear from Bhagavad-gita that these livingentities are always subordinate to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.Anyone who is able to understand this, according to the SupremePersonality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, knows the purpose of the Vedas; noone else knows the purpose of the Vedas.The word bhajati is very significant. In many places the word bhajatiis expressed in relationship with the service of the Supreme Lord. If aperson is engaged in full Krsna consciousness in devotional service ofthe Lord, it is to be understood that he has understood all the Vedicknowledge. In the Vaisnava parampara it is said that if one is engaged
in the devotional service of Krsna, then there is no need for any other
spiritual process for understanding the Supreme Absolute Truth. He hasalready come to the point, because he is engaged in the devotionalservice of the Lord. He has ended all preliminary processes ofunderstanding; similarly, if anyone, after speculating for hundreds ofthousands of lives, does not come to the point that Krsna is theSupreme Personality of Godhead and that one has to surrender there, allhis speculation for so many years and lives is a useless waste of time.
TEXT 20
iti guhyatamam sastram
idam uktam mayanaghaetad buddhva buddhiman syatkrta-krtyas ca bharata
SYNONYMSiti--thus; guhya-tamam--the most confidential; sastram--revealed
scripture; idam--this; uktam--disclosed; maya--by Me; anagha--O sinlessone; etat--this; buddhva--understanding; buddhi-man--intelligent; syat--one becomes; krta-krtyah--the most perfect; ca--and; bharata--O son ofBharata.
TRANSLATIONThis is the most confidential part of the Vedic scriptures, O sinless
one, and it is disclosed now by Me. Whoever understands this willbecome wise, and his endeavors will know perfection.
PURPORTThe Lord clearly explains here that this is the substance of all
revealed scriptures. And one should understand this as it is given bythe Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus one will become intelligentand perfect in transcendental knowledge. In other words, byunderstanding this philosophy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead andengaging in His transcendental service, everyone can become freed fromall contaminations of the modes of material nature. Devotional serviceis a process of spiritual understanding. Wherever devotional serviceexists, the material contamination cannot coexist. Devotional serviceto the Lord and the Lord Himself are one and the same because they arespiritual--the internal energy of the Supreme Lord. The Lord is said tobe the sun, and ignorance is called darkness. Where the sun is present,there is no question of darkness. Therefore, whenever devotionalservice is present under the proper guidance of a bona fide spiritualmaster, there is no question of ignorance.Everyone must take to this consciousness of Krsna and engage indevotional service to become intelligent and purified. Unless one comesto this position of understanding Krsna and engages in devotionalservice, however intelligent he may be in the estimation of some commonman, he is not perfectly intelligent.The word anagha, by which Arjuna is addressed, is significant. Anagha,"O sinless one," means that unless one is free from all sinfulreactions it is very difficult to understand Krsna. One has to becomefree from all contamination, all sinful activities; then he canunderstand. But devotional service is so pure and potent that once one
is engaged in devotional service he automatically comes to the stage of
sinlessness.While performing devotional service in the association of pure devoteesin full Krsna consciousness, there are certain things which require tobe vanquished altogether. The most important thing one has to surmountis weakness of the heart. The first falldown is caused by the desire tolord it over material nature. Thus one gives up the transcendentalloving service of the Supreme Lord. The second weakness of the heart isthat as one increases the propensity of lording it over materialnature, he becomes attached to matter and the possession of matter. Theproblems of material existence are due to these weaknesses of theheart.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Fifteenth Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Purusottama-yoga, the Yoga ofthe Supreme Person.
Chapter 16
The Divine And Demoniac Natures
TEXTS 1-3
sri-bhagavan uvaca
abhayam sattva-samsuddhirjnana-yoga-vyavasthitihdanam damas ca yajnas casvadhyayas tapa arjavam
ahimsa satyam akrodhas
tyagah santir apaisunamdaya bhutesv aloluptvammardavam hrir acapalam
tejah ksama dhrtih saucam
adroho nati-manitabhavanti sampadam daivimabhijatasya bharata
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; abhayam--
fearlessness; sattva-samsuddhih--purification of one's existence;jnana--knowledge; yoga--of linking up; vyavasthitih--the situation;danam--charity; damah ca--and controlling the mind; yajnah ca--andperformance of sacrifice; svadhyayah--study of Vedic literature; tapah--austerity; arjavam--simplicity; ahimsa--nonviolence; satyam--truthfulness; akrodhah--freedom from anger; tyagah--renunciation;santih--tranquillity; apaisunam--aversion to fault-finding; daya--mercy; bhutesu--towards all living entities; aloluptvam--freedom fromgreed; mardavam--gentleness; hrih--modesty; acapalam--determination;tejah--vigor; ksama--forgiveness; dhrtih--fortitude; saucam--cleanliness; adrohah--freedom from envy; na--not; ati-manita--expectation of honor; bhavanti--become; sampadam--qualities; daivim--transcendental; abhijatasya--of one who is born of; bharata--O son ofBharata.
TRANSLATION
The Blessed Lord said: Fearlessness, purification of one's existence,
cultivation of spiritual knowledge, charity, self-control, performanceof sacrifice, study of the Vedas, austerity and simplicity;nonviolence, truthfulness, freedom from anger; renunciation,tranquillity, aversion to faultfinding, compassion and freedom fromcovetousness; gentleness, modesty and steady determination; vigor,forgiveness, fortitude, cleanliness, freedom from envy and the passionfor honor--these transcendental qualities, O son of Bharata, belong togodly men endowed with divine nature.
PURPORTIn the beginning of the Fifteenth Chapter, the banyan tree of this
material world was explained. The extra roots coming out of it werecompared to the activities of the living entities, some auspicious,some inauspicious. In the Ninth Chapter, also, the devas, or godly, andthe asuras, the ungodly, or demons, were explained. Now, according toVedic rites, activities in the mode of goodness are consideredauspicious for progress on the path of liberation, and such activitiesare known as daivi prakrti, transcendental by nature. Those who aresituated in the transcendental nature make progress on the path ofliberation. For those who are acting in the modes of passion andignorance, on the other hand, there is no possibility of liberation.Either they will have to remain in this material world as human beings,or they will descend among the species of animals or even lower lifeforms. In this Sixteenth Chapter the Lord explains both thetranscendental nature and its attendant qualities and the demoniacnature and its qualities. He also explains the advantages anddisadvantages of these qualities.The word abhijatasya in reference to one born of transcendentalqualities or godly tendencies is very significant. To beget a child ina godly atmosphere is known in the Vedic scriptures as Garbhadhana-samskara. If the parents want a child in the godly qualities theyshould follow the ten principles of the human being. In Bhagavad-gitawe have studied also before that sex life for begetting a good child isKrsna Himself. Sex life is not condemned provided the process is usedin Krsna consciousness. Those who are in Krsna consciousness at leastshould not beget children like cats and dogs but should beget them sothat they may become Krsna conscious after birth. That should be theadvantage of children born of a father or mother absorbed in Krsnaconsciousness.The social institution known as varnasrama-dharma--the institutiondividing society into four divisions or castes--is not meant to dividehuman society according to birth. Such divisions are in terms ofeducational qualifications. They are to keep the society in a state ofpeace and prosperity. The qualities mentioned herein are explained astranscendental qualities meant for making a person progress inspiritual understanding so that he can get liberated from the materialworld. In the varnasrama institution the sannyasi, or the person in therenounced order of life, is considered to be the head or the spiritualmaster of all the social statuses and orders. A brahmana is consideredto be the spiritual master of the three other sections of a society,namely, the ksatriyas, the vaisyas and the sudras, but a sannyasi, whois on the top of the institution, is considered to be the spiritualmaster of the brahmanas also. For a sannyasi, the first qualificationshould be fearlessness. Because a sannyasi has to be alone without anysupport or guarantee of support, he has simply to depend on the mercyof the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If he thinks, "After I leave my
connections, who will protect me?" he should not accept the renounced
order of life. One must be fully convinced that Krsna or the SupremePersonality of Godhead in His localized aspect as Paramatma is alwayswithin, that He is seeing everything and that He always knows what oneintends to do. One must thus have firm conviction that Krsna asParamatma will take care of a soul surrendered to Him. "I shall neverbe alone," one should think. "Even if I live in the darkest regions ofa forest I shall be accompanied by Krsna, and He will give me allprotection." That conviction is called abhayam, without fear. Thisstate of mind is necessary for a person in the renounced order of life.Then he has to purify his existence. There are so many rules andregulations to be followed in the renounced order of life. Mostimportant of all, a sannyasi is strictly forbidden to have any intimaterelationship with a woman. He is even forbidden to talk with a woman ina secluded place. Lord Caitanya was an ideal sannyasi, and when He wasat Puri His feminine devotees could not even come near to offer theirrespects. They were advised to bow down from a distant place. This isnot a sign of hatred for women as a class, but it is a strictureimposed on the sannyasi not to have close connections with women. Onehas to follow the rules and regulations of a particular status of lifein order to purify his existence. For a sannyasi, intimate relationswith women and possession of wealth for sense gratification arestrictly forbidden. The ideal sannyasi was Lord Caitanya Himself, andwe can learn from His life that He was very strict in regards to women.Although He is considered to be the most liberal incarnation ofGodhead, accepting the most fallen conditioned souls, He strictlyfollowed the rules and regulations of the sannyasa order of life inconnection with association with woman. One of His personal associates,namely Chota Haridasa, was personally associated with Lord Caitanyaalong with His other confidential personal associates, but somehow orother this Chota Haridasa looked lustily on a young woman, and LordCaitanya was so strict that He at once rejected him from the society ofHis personal associates. Lord Caitanya said, "For a sannyasi or anyonewho is aspiring to get out of the clutches of material nature andtrying to elevate himself to the spiritual nature and go back home,back to Godhead, for him, looking toward material possessions and womenfor sense gratification--not even enjoying them, but just lookingtoward them with such a propensity--is so condemned that he had bettercommit suicide before experiencing such illicit desires." So these arethe processes for purification.The next item is jnana-yoga-vyavasthiti: being engaged in thecultivation of knowledge. Sannyasi life is meant for distributingknowledge to the householders and others who have forgotten their reallife of spiritual advancement. A sannyasi is supposed to beg from doorto door for his livelihood, but this does not mean that he is a beggar.Humility is also one of the qualifications of a transcendentallysituated person, and out of sheer humility the sannyasi goes from doorto door, not exactly for the purpose of begging, but to see thehouseholders and awaken them to Krsna consciousness. This is the dutyof a sannyasi. If he is actually advanced and so ordered by hisspiritual master, he should preach Krsna consciousness with logic andunderstanding, and if he is not so advanced he should not accept therenounced order of life. But even if he has accepted the renouncedorder of life without sufficient knowledge, he should engage himselffully in hearing from a bona fide spiritual master to cultivateknowledge. A sannyasi, or one in the renounced order of life, must besituated in fearlessness, sattva-samsuddhi (purity) and jnana-yoga(knowledge).
The next item is charity. Charity is meant for the householders. The
householders should earn a livelihood by an honorable means and spendfifty percent of their income to propagate Krsna consciousness all overthe world. Thus a householder should give in charity to suchinstitutional societies that are engaged in that way. Charity should begiven to the right receiver. There are different kinds of charities, aswill be explained later on, charity in the modes of goodness, passionand ignorance. Charity in the mode of goodness is recommended by thescriptures, but charity in the modes of passion and ignorance is notrecommended because it is simply a waste of money. Charity should begiven only to propagate Krsna consciousness all over the world. That ischarity in the mode of goodness.Then as far as dama (self-control) is concerned, it is not only meantfor other orders of religious society, but it is especially meant forthe householder. Although he has a wife, a householder should not usehis senses for sex life unnecessarily. There are restrictions for thehouseholders even in sex life, which should only be engaged in for thepropagation of children. If he does not require children, he should notenjoy sex life with his wife. Modern society enjoys sex life withcontraceptive methods or more abominable methods to avoid theresponsibility of children. This is not in the transcendental qualitybut is demoniac. If anyone, even if he is a householder, wants to makeprogress in spiritual life, he must control his sex life and should notbeget a child without the purpose of serving Krsna. If he is able tobeget children who will be in Krsna consciousness, one can producehundreds of children, but without this capacity one should not indulgeonly for sense pleasure.Sacrifice is another item to be performed by the householders becausesacrifices require a large amount of money. Other orders of life,namely brahmacarya, vanaprastha and sannyasa, have no money; they liveby begging. So performance of different types of sacrifice is meant forthe householder. They should perform agni-hotra sacrifices as enjoinedin the Vedic literature, but such sacrifices at the present moment arevery expensive, and it is not possible for any householder to performthem. The best sacrifice recommended in this age is called sankirtana-yajna, the chanting of Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. This is the best and mostinexpensive sacrifice; everyone can adopt it and derive benefit. Sothese three items, namely charity, sense control and performance ofsacrifice, are meant for the householder.Then svadhyaya, Vedic study, and tapas, austerity, and arjavam,gentleness or simplicity, are meant for brahmacarya or student life.Brahmacaris should have no connection with women; they should live alife of celibacy and engage the mind in the study of Vedic literaturefor cultivation of spiritual knowledge. This is called svadhyaya.Tapas or austerity, is especially meant for the retired life. One mustnot remain a householder throughout his whole life; he must alwaysremember that there are four divisions of life, brahmacarya, grhastha,vanaprastha and sannyasa. So after grhastha, householder life, oneshould retire. If one lives for a hundred years, he should spendtwenty-five years in student life, twenty-five in householder life,twenty-five in retired life and twenty-five in the renounced order oflife. These are the regulations of the Vedic religious discipline. Aman retired from household life must practice austerities of the body,mind and tongue. That is tapasya. The entire varnasrama-dharma societyis meant for tapasya. Without tapasya or austerity, no human being canget liberation. The theory that there is no need of austerity in life,that one can go on speculating and everything will be nice, is neither
recommended in the Vedic literature nor in Bhagavad-gita. Such theories
are manufactured by show-bottle spiritualists who are trying to gathermore followers. If there are restrictions, rules and regulations,people will not become attracted. Therefore those who want followers inthe name of religion, just to have a show only, don't restrict thelives of their students nor their own lives. But that method is notapproved by the Vedas.As far as simplicity is concerned, not only should a particular orderof life follow this principle, but every member, be he in thebrahmacari asrama, or grhastha asrama, or vanaprastha asrama orsannyasa asrama. One must live very simply.Ahimsa means not arresting the progressive life of any living entity.One should not think that since the spirit spark is never killed evenafter the killing of the body there is no harm in killing animals forsense gratification. People are now addicted to eating animals, inspite of having an ample supply of grains, fruits and milk. There is nonecessity for animal killing. This injunction is for everyone. Whenthere is no other alternative, one may kill an animal, but it should beoffered in sacrifice. At any rate, when there is an ample food supplyfor humanity, persons who are desiring to make advancement in spiritualrealization should not commit violence to animals. Real ahimsa meansnot checking anyone's progressive life. The animals are also makingprogress in their evolutionary life by transmigrating from one categoryof animal life to another. If a particular animal is killed, then hisprogress is checked. If an animal is staying in a particular body forso many days or so many years and is untimely killed, then he has tocome back again in that form of life to complete the remaining days inorder to be promoted to another species of life. So their progressshould not be checked simply to satisfy one's palate. This is calledahimsa.Satyam. This word means that one should not distort the truth for somepersonal interest. In Vedic literature there are some difficultpassages, but the meaning or the purpose should be learned from a bonafide spiritual master. That is the process for understanding the Vedas.Sruti means that one should hear from the authority. One should notconstrue some interpretation for his personal interest. There are somany commentaries on Bhagavad-gita that misinterpret the original text.The real import of the word should be presented, and that should belearned from a bona fide spiritual master.Akrodha means to check anger. Even if there is provocation one shouldbe tolerant, for once one becomes angry his whole body becomespolluted. Anger is a product of the modes of passion and lust, so onewho is transcendentally situated should check himself from anger.Apaisunam means that one should not find fault with others or correctthem unnecessarily. Of course to call a thief a thief is notfaultfinding, but to call an honest person a thief is very muchoffensive for one who is making advancement in spiritual life. Hrimeans that one should be very modest and must not perform some actwhich is abominable. Acapalam, determination, means that one should notbe agitated or frustrated in some attempt. There may be failure in someattempt, but one should not be sorry for that; he should make progresswith patience and determination.The word tejas used here is meant for the ksatriyas. The ksatriyasshould always be very strong to be able to give protection to the weak.They should not pose themselves as nonviolent. If violence is required,they must exhibit it.Saucam means cleanliness, not only in mind and body but in one'sdealings also. It is especially meant for the mercantile people, who
should not deal in the black market. Nati-manita, not expecting honor,
applies to the sudras, the worker class, who are considered, accordingto Vedic injunctions, to be the lowest of the four classes. They shouldnot be puffed up with unnecessary prestige or honor and should remainin their own status. It is the duty of the sudras to offer respect tothe higher classes for the upkeep of the social order.All these twenty-six qualifications mentioned are transcendentalqualities. They should be cultivated according to the differentstatuses of the social order. The purport is that even though materialconditions are miserable, if these qualities are developed by practice,by all classes of men, then gradually it is possible to rise to thehighest platform of transcendental realization.
TEXT 4
dambho darpo 'bhimanas ca
krodhah parusyam eva caajnanam cabhijatasyapartha sampadam asurim
SYNONYMSdambhah--pride; darpah--arrogance; abhimanah--conceit; ca--and;
krodhah--anger; parusyam--harshness; eva--certainly; ca--and; ajnanam--ignorance; ca--and; abhijatasya--one who is born of; partha--O son ofPrtha; sampadam--nature; asurim--demoniac.
TRANSLATIONArrogance, pride, anger, conceit, harshness and ignorance--these
qualities belong to those of demoniac nature, O son of Prtha.
PURPORTIn this verse, the royal road to hell is described. The demoniac want
to make a show of religion and advancement in spiritual science,although they do not follow the principles. They are always arrogantand proud in possessing some type of education or so much wealth. Theydesire to be worshiped by others, and demand respectability, althoughthey do not command respect. Over trifles they become very angry andspeak harshly, not gently. They do not know what should be done andwhat should not be done. They do everything whimsically, according totheir own desire, and they do not recognize any authority. Thesedemoniac qualities are taken on by them from the beginning of theirbodies in the wombs of their mothers, and as they grow they manifestall these inauspicious qualities.
TEXT 5
daivi sampad vimoksaya
nibandhayasuri matama sucah sampadam daivimabhijato 'si pandava
SYNONYMSdaivi--transcendental; sampat--nature; vimoksaya--meant for liberation;
nibandhaya--for bondage; asuri--demoniac qualities; mata--it is
considered; ma--do not; sucah--worry; sampadam--nature; daivim--
transcendental; abhijatah--born; asi--you are; pandava--O son of Pandu.
TRANSLATIONThe transcendental qualities are conducive to liberation, whereas the
demoniac qualities make for bondage. Do not worry, O son of Pandu, foryou are born with the divine qualities.
PURPORTLord Krsna encouraged Arjuna by telling him that he was not born with
demoniac qualities. His involvement in the fight was not demoniacbecause he was considering the pros and cons. He was consideringwhether respectable persons such as Bhisma and Drona should be killedor not, so he was not acting under the influence of anger, falseprestige, or harshness. Therefore he was not of the quality of thedemons. For a ksatriya, a military man, shooting arrows at the enemy isconsidered transcendental, and refraining from such a duty is demoniac.Therefore, there was no cause for Arjuna to lament. Anyone who performsthe regulative principles of the different orders of life istranscendentally situated.
TEXT 6
dvau bhuta-sargau loke 'smin
daiva asura eva cadaivo vistarasah proktaasuram partha me srnu
SYNONYMSdvau--two; bhuta-sargau--created living beings; loke--in the world;
asmin--this; daivah--godly; asurah--demoniac; eva--certainly; ca--and;daivah--divine; vistarasah--at great length; proktah--said; asuram--demoniac; partha--O son of Prtha; me--from Me; srnu--just hear.
TRANSLATIONO son of Prtha, in this world there are two kinds of created beings.
One is called the divine and the other demoniac. I have alreadyexplained to you at length the divine qualities. Now hear from Me ofthe demoniac.
PURPORTLord Krsna, having assured Arjuna that he was born with the divine
qualities, is now describing the demoniac way. The conditioned livingentities are divided into two classes in this world. Those who are bornwith divine qualities follow a regulated life; that is to say theyabide by the injunctions in scriptures and by the authorities. Oneshould perform duties in the light of authoritative scripture. Thismentality is called divine. One who does not follow the regulativeprinciples as they are laid down in the scriptures and who actsaccording to his whims is called demoniac or asuric. There is no othercriterion but obedience to the regulative principles of scriptures. Itis mentioned in Vedic literature that both the demigods and the demons
are born of the Prajapati; the only difference is that one class obeys
the Vedic injunctions and the other does not.
TEXT 7
pravrttim ca nivrttim ca
jana na vidur asurahna saucam napi cacarona satyam tesu vidyate
SYNONYMSpravrttim--proper action; ca--also; nivrttim--improper action; ca--and;
janah--persons; na--never; viduh--know; asurah--demoniac qualities; na--never; saucam--cleanliness; na--nor; api--also; ca--and; acarah--behavior; na--never; satyam--truth; tesu--in them; vidyate--there is.
TRANSLATIONThose who are demoniac do not know what is to be done and what is not
to be done. Neither cleanliness nor proper behavior nor truth is foundin them.
PURPORTIn every civilized human society there is some set of scriptural rules
and regulations which are followed from the beginning, especially amongthe Aryans, those who adopt the Vedic civilization and who are known asthe most advanced civilized people. Those who do not follow thescriptural injunctions are supposed to be demons. Therefore it isstated here that the demons do not know the scriptural rules, nor dothey have any inclination to follow them. Most of them do not knowthem, and even if some of them know, they do not have the tendency tofollow them. They have no faith, nor are they willing to act in termsof the Vedic injunctions. The demons are not clean, either externallyor internally. One should always be careful to keep his body clean bybathing, brushing teeth, shaving, changing clothes, etc. As far asinternal cleanliness is concerned, one should always remember the holynames of God and chant Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. The demons neither like norfollow all these rules for external and internal cleanliness.As for behavior, there are many rules and regulations guiding humanbehavior, such as the Manu-samhita, which is the law of the human race.Even up to today, those who are Hindu follow the Manu-samhita. Laws ofinheritance and other legalities are derived from this book. Now, inthe Manu-samhita, it is clearly stated that a woman should not be givenfreedom. That does not mean that women are to be kept as slaves, butthey are like children. Children are not given freedom, but that doesnot mean that they are kept as slaves. The demons have now neglectedsuch injunctions, and they think that women should be given as muchfreedom as men. However, this has not improved the social condition ofthe world. Actually, a woman should be given protection at every stageof life. She should be given protection by the father in her youngerdays, by the husband in her youth, and by the grown-up sons in her oldage. This is proper social behavior according to the Manu-samhita. Butmodern education has artificially devised a puffed-up concept ofwomanly life, and therefore marriage is practically now an imaginationin human society. Nor is the moral condition of women very good now.
The demons, therefore, do not accept any instruction which is good for
society, and because they do not follow the experience of great sagesand the rules and regulations laid down by the sages, the socialcondition of the demoniac people is very miserable.
TEXT 8
asatyam apratistham te
jagad ahur anisvaramaparaspara-sambhutamkim anyat kama-haitukam
SYNONYMSasatyam--unreal; apratistham--without foundation; te--they; jagat--the
cosmic manifestation; ahuh--is said; anisvaram--with no controller;aparaspara--by mutual lust; sambhutam--cause; kim anyat--there is noother cause; kama-haitukam--it is due to lust only.
TRANSLATIONThey say that this world is unreal, that there is no foundation and
that there is no God in control. It is produced of sex desire, and hasno cause other than lust.
PURPORTThe demonic conclude that the world is phantasmagoria. There is no
cause, no effect, no controller, no purpose: everything is unreal. Theysay that this cosmic manifestation arises due to chance materialactions and reactions. They do not think that the world was created byGod for a certain purpose. They have their own theory: that the worldhas come about in its own way and that there is no reason to believethat there is a God behind it. For them there is no difference betweenspirit and matter, and they do not accept the Supreme Spirit.Everything is matter only, and the whole cosmos is supposed to be amass of ignorance. According to them, everything is void, and whatevermanifestation exists is due to our ignorance in perception. They takeit for granted that all manifestation of diversity is a display ofignorance. Just as in a dream we may create so many things whichactually have no existence, so when we are awake we shall see thateverything is simply a dream. But factually, although the demons saythat life is a dream, they are very expert in enjoying this dream. Andso, instead of acquiring knowledge, they become more and moreimplicated in their dreamland. They conclude that as a child is simplythe result of sexual intercourse between man and woman, this world isborn without any soul. For them it is only a combination of matter thathas produced the living entities, and there is no question of theexistence of the soul. As many living creatures come out fromperspiration and from a dead body without any cause, similarly, thewhole living world has come out of the material combinations of thecosmic manifestation. Therefore material nature is the cause of thismanifestation, and there is no other cause. They do not believe in thewords of Krsna in Bhagavad-gita: mayadhyaksena prakrtih suyate sa-caracaram. "Under My direction the whole material world is moving." Inother words, amongst the demons there is no perfect knowledge of thecreation of the world; every one of them has some particular theory ofhis own. According to them, one interpretation of the scriptures is as
good as another, for they do not believe in a standard understanding of
the scriptural injunctions.
TEXT 9
etam drstim avastabhya
nastatmano 'lpa-buddhayahprabhavanty ugra-karmanahksayaya jagato 'hitah
SYNONYMSetam--thus; drstim--vision; avastabhya--accepting; nasta--lost;
atmanah--self; alpa-buddhayah--less intelligent; prabhavanti--flourish;ugra-karmanah--in painful activities; ksayaya--for destruction;jagatah--of the world; ahitah--unbeneficial.
TRANSLATIONFollowing such conclusions, the demoniac, who are lost to themselves
and who have no intelligence, engage in unbeneficial, horrible worksmeant to destroy the world.
PURPORTThe demoniac are engaged in activities that will lead the world to
destruction. The Lord states here that they are less intelligent. Thematerialists, who have no concept of God, think that they areadvancing. But, according to Bhagavad-gita, they are unintelligent anddevoid of all sense. They try to enjoy this material world to theutmost limit and therefore always engage in inventing something forsense gratification. Such materialistic inventions are considered to beadvancement of human civilization, but the result is that people growmore and more violent and more and more cruel, cruel to animals andcruel to other human beings. They have no idea how to behave toward oneanother. Animal killing is very prominent amongst demoniac people. Suchpeople are considered the enemies of the world because ultimately theywill invent or create something which will bring destruction to all.Indirectly, this verse anticipates the invention of nuclear weapons, ofwhich the whole world today is very proud. At any moment war may takeplace, and these atomic weapons may create havoc. Such things arecreated solely for the destruction of the world, and this is indicatedhere. Due to godlessness, such weapons are invented in human society;they are not meant for the peace and prosperity of the world.
TEXT 10
kamam asritya duspuram
dambha-mana-madanvitahmohad grhitvasad-grahanpravartante 'suci-vratah
SYNONYMSkamam--lust; asritya--taking shelter of; duspuram--insatiable; dambha--
pride; mana--false prestige; mada-anvitah--absorbed in conceit; mohat--by illusion; grhitva--taking; asat--nonpermanent; grahan--things;pravartante--flourish; asuci--unclean; vratah--avowed.
TRANSLATION
The demoniac, taking shelter of insatiable lust, pride and false
prestige, and being thus illusioned, are always sworn to unclean work,attracted by the impermanent.
PURPORTThe demoniac mentality is described here. The demons lust is never
satiated. They will go on increasing and increasing their insatiabledesires for material enjoyment. Although they are always full ofanxieties on account of accepting nonpermanent things, they stillcontinue to engage in such activities out of illusion. They have noknowledge and cannot tell that they are heading the wrong way.Accepting nonpermanent things, such demoniac people create their ownGod, create their own hymns and chant accordingly. The result is thatthey become more and more attracted to two things--sex enjoyment andaccumulation of material wealth. The word asuci-vratah, "unclean vows,"is very significant in this connection. Such demoniac people are onlyattracted by wine, women, gambling and meat-eating; those are theirasuci, unclean habits. Induced by pride and false prestige, they createsome principles of religion which are not approved by the Vedicinjunctions. Although such demoniac people are most abominable in theworld, still, by artificial means the world creates a false honor forthem. Although they are gliding toward hell, they consider themselvesvery much advanced.
TEXTS 11-12
cintam aparimeyam ca
pralayantam upasritahkamopabhoga-paramaetavad iti niscitah
asa-pasa-satair baddhah
kama-krodha-parayanahihante kama-bhogarthamanyayenartha-sancayan
SYNONYMScintam--fears and anxieties; aparimeyam--unmeasurable; ca--and;
pralaya-antam--unto the point of death; upasritah--having taken shelterof them; kama-upabhoga--sense gratification; paramah--the highest goalof life; etavat--thus; iti--in this way; niscitah--ascertained; asa-pasa--entanglements in the network of hope; sataih--by hundreds;baddhah--being bound; kama--lust; krodha--anger; parayanah--alwayssituated in that mentality; ihante--desire; kama--lust; bhoga--senseenjoyment; artham--for that purpose; anyayena--illegally; artha--wealth; sancayan--accumulate.
TRANSLATIONThey believe that to gratify the senses unto the end of life is the
prime necessity of human civilization. Thus there is no end to theiranxiety. Bound by hundreds and thousands of desires, by lust and anger,they secure money by illegal means for sense gratification.
PURPORT
The demoniac accept that the enjoyment of the senses is the ultimate
goal of life, and this concept they maintain until death. They do notbelieve in life after death, and they do not believe that one takes ondifferent types of bodies according to one's karma, or activities inthis world. Their plans for life are never finished, and they go onpreparing plan after plan, all of which are never finished. We havepersonal experience of a person of such demoniac mentality, who, evenat the point of death, was requesting the physician to prolong his lifefor four years more because his plans were not yet complete. Suchfoolish people do not know that a physician cannot prolong life evenfor a moment. When the notice is there, there is no consideration ofthe man's desire. The laws of nature do not allow a second beyond whatone is destined to enjoy.The demoniac person, who has no faith in God or the Supersoul withinhimself, performs all kinds of sinful activities simply for sensegratification. He does not know that there is a witness sitting withinhis heart. The Supersoul is observing the activities of the individualsoul. As it is stated in the Upanisads, there are two birds sitting inone tree; one is acting and enjoying or suffering the fruits of thebranches, and the other is witnessing. But one who is demoniac has noknowledge of Vedic scripture, nor has he any faith; therefore he feelsfree to do anything for sense enjoyment, regardless of theconsequences.
TEXTS 13-15
idam adya maya labdham
imam prapsye manorathamidam astidam api mebhavisyati punar dhanam
asau maya hatah satrur
hanisye caparan apiisvaro 'ham aham bhogisiddho 'ham balavan sukhi
adhyo 'bhijanavan asmi
ko 'nyo 'sti sadrso mayayaksye dasyami modisyaity ajnana-vimohitah
SYNONYMSidam--this; adya--today; maya--by me; labdham--gained; imam--this;
prapsye--I shall gain; manah-ratham--according to my desires; idam--this; asti--there is; idam--this; api--also; me--mine; bhavisyati--willincrease in the future; punah--again; dhanam--wealth; asau--that; maya--by me; hatah--has been killed; satruh--enemy; hanisye--I shall kill;ca--also; aparan--others; api--certainly; isvarah--the lord; aham--Iam; aham--I am; bhogi--the enjoyer; siddhah--perfect; aham--I am; bala-van--powerful; sukhi--happy; adhyah--wealthy; abhijana-van--surroundedby aristocratic relatives; asmi--I am; kah--who else; anyah--other;asti--there is; sadrsah--like; maya--me; yaksye--I shall sacrifice;dasyami--I shall give charity; modisye--I shall rejoice; iti--thus;ajnana--by ignorance; vimohitah--deluded by.
TRANSLATION
The demoniac person thinks: "So much wealth do I have today, and I will
gain more according to my schemes. So much is mine now, and it willincrease in the future, more and more. He is my enemy, and I havekilled him; and my other enemies will also be killed. I am the lord ofeverything. I am the enjoyer. I am perfect, powerful and happy. I amthe richest man, surrounded by aristocratic relatives. There is none sopowerful and happy as I am. I shall perform sacrifices, I shall givesome charity, and thus I shall rejoice." In this way, such persons aredeluded by ignorance.
TEXT 16
aneka-citta-vibhranta
moha-jala-samavrtahprasaktah kama-bhogesupatanti narake 'sucau
SYNONYMSaneka--numerous; citta vibhrantah--perplexed by anxieties; moha--of
illusions; jala--by a network; samavrtah--surrounded; prasaktah--attached; kama--lust; bhogesu--sense gratification; patanti--glidesdown; narake--into hell; asucau--unclean.
TRANSLATIONThus perplexed by various anxieties and bound by a network of
illusions, one becomes too strongly attached to sense enjoyment andfalls down into hell.
PURPORTThe demoniac man knows no limit to his desire to acquire money. That is
unlimited. He only thinks how much assessment he has just now andschemes to engage that stock of wealth further and further. For thatreason, he does not hesitate to act in any sinful way and so deals inthe black market for illegal gratification. He is enamored by thepossessions he has already, such as land, family, house and bankbalance, and he is always planning to improve them. He believes in hisown strength, and he does not know that whatever he is gaining is dueto his past good deeds. He is given an opportunity to accumulate suchthings, but he has no conception of past causes. He simply thinks thatall his mass of wealth is due to his own endeavor. A demoniac personbelieves in the strength of his personal work, not in the law of karma.According to the law of karma, a man takes his birth in a high family,or becomes rich, or very well educated, or very beautiful because ofgood work in the past. The demoniac think that all these things areaccidental and due to the strength of his personal ability. He does notsense any arrangement behind all the varieties of people, beauty andeducation. Anyone who comes into competition with such a demoniac manis his enemy. There are many demoniac people, and each is enemy to theothers. This enmity becomes more and more deep--between persons, thenbetween families, then between societies, and at last between nations.Therefore there is constant strife, war and enmity all over the world.
Each demoniac person thinks that he can live at the sacrifice of all
others. Generally, a demoniac person thinks of himself as the SupremeGod, and a demoniac preacher tells his followers: "Why are you seekingGod elsewhere? You are all yourselves God! Whatever you like, you cando. Don't believe in God. Throw away God. God is dead." These are thedemoniac's preachings.Although the demoniac person sees others equally rich and influential,or even more so, he thinks that no one is richer than he and that noone is more influential than he. As far as promotion to the higherplanetary system is concerned, he does not believe in performing yajnasor sacrifices. Demons think that they will manufacture their ownprocess of yajna and prepare some machine, by which they will be ableto reach any higher planet. The best example of such a demoniac man wasRavana. He offered a program to the people by which he would prepare astaircase so that anyone could reach the heavenly planets withoutperforming sacrifices, such as are prescribed in the Vedas. Similarly,in the present age such demoniac men are striving to reach the higherplanetary systems by mechanical arrangements. These are examples ofbewilderment. The result is that, without their knowledge, they aregliding toward hell. Here the Sanskrit word moha-jala is verysignificant. Jala means net; like fish caught in a net, they have noway to come out.
TEXT 17
atma-sambhavitah stabdha
dhana-mana-madanvitahyajante nama-yajnais tedambhenavidhi-purvakam
SYNONYMSatma-sambhavitah--self-complacent; stabdhah--impudent; dhana-mana--
wealth and false prestige; mada anvitah--absorbed in pride; yajante--perform sacrifices; nama--in name only; yajnaih--with such a sacrifice;te--they; dambhena--out of pride; avidhi-purvakam--without followingany rules and regulations.
TRANSLATIONSelf-complacent and always impudent, deluded by wealth and false
prestige, they sometimes perform sacrifices in name only, withoutfollowing any rules or regulations.
PURPORTThinking themselves all in all, not caring for any authority or
scripture, the demoniac sometimes perform so-called religious orsacrificial rites. And since they do not believe in authority, they arevery impudent. This is due to illusion caused by accumulating somewealth and false prestige. Sometimes such demons take up the role ofpreacher, mislead the people, and become known as religious reformersor as incarnations of God. They make a show of performing sacrifices,or they worship the demigods, or manufacture their own God. Common menadvertise them as God and worship them, and by the foolish they areconsidered advanced in the principles of religion, or in the principlesof spiritual knowledge. They take the dress of the renounced order oflife and engage in all nonsense in that dress. Actually there are so
many restrictions for one who has renounced this world. The demons,
however, do not care for such restrictions. They think that whateverpath one can create is one's own path; there is no such thing as astandard path one has to follow. The word avidhi-purvakam, meaning adisregard for the rules and regulations, is especially stressed here.These things are always due to ignorance and illusion.
TEXT 18
ahankaram balam darpam
kamam krodham ca samsritahmam atma-para-dehesupradvisanto 'bhyasuyakah
SYNONYMSahankaram--false ego; balam--strength; darpam--pride; kamam--lust;
krodham--anger; ca--also; samsritah--having taken shelter of; mam--Me;atma--one's own; para dehesu--in other bodies; pradvisantah--blasphemes; abhyasuyakah--envious.
TRANSLATIONBewildered by false ego, strength, pride, lust and anger, the demon
becomes envious of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is situatedin his own body and in the bodies of others, and blaspheme against thereal religion.
PURPORTA demoniac person, being always against God's supremacy, does not like
to believe in the scriptures. He is envious of both the scriptures andof the existence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is causedby his so-called prestige and his accumulation of wealth and strength.He does not know that the present life is a preparation for the nextlife. Not knowing this, he is actually envious of his own self, as wellas of others. He commits violence on other bodies and on his own. Hedoes not care for the supreme control of the Personality of Godheadbecause he has no knowledge. Being envious of the scriptures and theSupreme Personality of Godhead, he puts forward false arguments againstthe existence of God and refutes the scriptural authority. He thinkshimself independent and powerful in every action. He thinks that sinceno one can equal him in strength, power, or in wealth, he can act inany way and no one can stop him. If he has an enemy who might check theadvancement of his sensual activities, he makes plans to cut him downby his own power.
TEXT 19
tan aham dvisatah kruran
samsaresu naradhamanksipamy ajasram asubhanasurisv eva yonisu
SYNONYMStan--those; aham--I; dvisatah--envious; kruran--mischievous; samsaresu-
-into the ocean of material existence; nara-adhaman--the lowest of
mankind; ksipami--put; ajasram--innumerable; asubhan--inauspicious;
asurisu--demoniac; eva--certainly; yonisu--in the wombs.
TRANSLATIONThose who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among men,
are cast by Me into the ocean of material existence, into variousdemoniac species of life.
PURPORTIn this verse it is clearly indicated that the placing of a particular
individual soul in a particular body is the prerogative of the supremewill. The demoniac person may not agree to accept the supremacy of theLord, and it is a fact that he may act according to his own whims, buthis next birth will depend upon the decision of the Supreme Personalityof Godhead and not on himself. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam, Third Canto,it is stated that an individual soul, after his death, is put into thewomb of a mother where he gets a particular type of body under thesupervision of superior power. Therefore in the material existence wefind so many species of life--animals, insects, men, and so on. All arearranged by the superior power. They are not accidental. As for thedemoniac, it is clearly said here that they are perpetually put intothe wombs of demons, and thus they continue to be envious, the lowestof mankind. Such demoniac species of men are held to be always full oflust, always violent and hateful and always unclean. They are just likeso many beasts in a jungle.
TEXT 20
asurim yonim apanna
mudha janmani janmanimam aprapyaiva kaunteyatato yanty adhamam gatim
SYNONYMSasurim--demoniac; yonim--species; apannah--gaining; mudhah--the
foolish; janmani janmani--in birth after birth; mam--unto Me; aprapya--without achieving; eva--certainly; kaunteya--O son of Kunti; tatah--thereafter; yanti--goes; adhamam--condemned; gatim--destination.
TRANSLATIONAttaining repeated birth amongst the species of demoniac life, such
persons can never approach Me. Gradually they sink down to the mostabominable type of existence.
PURPORTIt is known that God is all-merciful, but here we find that God is
never merciful to the demoniac. It is clearly stated that the demoniacpeople, life after life, are put into the wombs of similar demons, and,not achieving the mercy of the Supreme Lord, they go down and down, sothat at last they achieve bodies like those of cats, dogs and hogs. Itis clearly stated that such demons have practically no chance ofreceiving the mercy of God at any stage of later life. In the Vedasalso it is stated that such persons gradually sink to become dogs and
hogs. It may be then argued in this connection that God should not be
advertised as all-merciful if He is not merciful to such demons. Inanswer to this question, in the Vedanta-sutra we find that the SupremeLord has no hatred for anyone. The placing of the asuras, the demons,in the lowest status of life is simply another feature of His mercy.Sometimes the asuras are killed by the Supreme Lord, but this killingis also good for them, for in Vedic literature we find that anyone whois killed by the Supreme Lord becomes liberated. There are instances inhistory of many asuras--Ravana, Kamsa, Hiranyakasipu--to whom the Lordappeared in various incarnations just to kill them. Therefore God'smercy is shown to the asuras if they are fortunate enough to be killedby Him.
TEXT 21
tri-vidham narakasyedam
dvaram nasanam atmanahkamah krodhas tatha lobhastasmad etat trayam tyajet
SYNONYMStri-vidham--three kinds of; narakasya--hellish; idam--this; dvaram--
gate; nasanam--destructive; atmanah--of the self; kamah--lust; krodhah--anger; tatha--as well as; lobhah--greed; tasmat--therefore; etat--these; trayam--three; tyajet--must give up.
TRANSLATIONThere are three gates leading to this hell--lust, anger and greed.
Every sane man should give these up, for they lead to the degradationof the soul.
PURPORTThe beginning of demoniac life is described herein. One tries to
satisfy his lust, and when he cannot, anger and greed arise. A sane manwho does not want to glide down to the species of demoniac life musttry to give up these three enemies which can kill the self to such anextent that there will be no possibility of liberation from thismaterial entanglement.
TEXT 22
etair vimuktah kaunteya
tamo-dvarais tribhir narahacaraty atmanah sreyastato yati param gatim
SYNONYMSetaih--by these; vimuktah--being liberated; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
tamah-dvaraih--the gates of ignorance; tribhih--three kinds of; narah--a person; acarati--performs; atmanah--self; sreyah--benediction; tatah--thereafter; yati--goes; param--supreme; gatim--destination.
TRANSLATION
The man who has escaped these three gates of hell, O son of Kunti,
performs acts conducive to self-realization and thus gradually attainsthe supreme destination.
PURPORTOne should be very careful of these three enemies to human life: lust,
anger and greed. The more a person is freed from lust, anger and greed,the more his existence becomes pure. Then he can follow the rules andregulations enjoined in the Vedic literature. By following theregulative principles of human life, one gradually raises himself tothe platform of spiritual realization. If one is so fortunate, by suchpractice, to rise to the platform of Krsna consciousness, then successis guaranteed for him. In the Vedic literature, the ways of action andreaction are prescribed to enable one to come to the stage ofpurification. The whole method is based on giving up lust, greed andanger. By cultivating knowledge of this process, one can be elevated tothe highest position of self-realization; this self-realization isperfected in devotional service. In that devotional service, theliberation of the conditioned soul is guaranteed. Therefore, accordingto the Vedic system, there are instituted the four orders of life andthe four statuses of life, called the caste system and the spiritualorder system. There are different rules and regulations for differentcastes or divisions of society, and if a person is able to follow them,he will be automatically raised to the highest platform of spiritualrealization. Then he can have liberation without a doubt.
TEXT 23
yah sastra-vidhim utsrjya
vartate kama-karatahna sa siddhim avapnotina sukham na param gatim
SYNONYMSyah--anyone; sastra-vidhim--the regulations of the scriptures; utsrjya-
-giving up; vartate--remains; kama-karatah--acting whimsically in lust;na--never; sah--he; siddhim--perfection; avapnoti--achieves; na--never;sukham--happiness; na--never; param--the supreme; gatim--perfectionalstage.
TRANSLATIONBut he who discards scriptural injunctions and acts according to his
own whims attains neither perfection, nor happiness, nor the supremedestination.
PURPORTAs described before, the sastra-vidhi, or the direction of the sastra,
is given to the different castes and orders of human society. Everyoneis expected to follow these rules and regulations. If one does notfollow them and acts whimsically according to his lust, greed anddesire, then he never will be perfect in his life. In other words, aman may theoretically know all these things, but if he does not applythem in his own life, then he is to be known as the lowest of mankind.In the human form of life, a living entity is expected to be sane and
to follow the regulations given for elevating his life to the highest
platform, but if he does not follow them, then he degrades himself. Buteven if he follows the rules and regulations and moral principles andultimately does not come to the stage of understanding the SupremeLord, then all his knowledge becomes spoiled. Therefore one shouldgradually raise himself to the platform of Krsna consciousness anddevotional service; it is then and there that he can attain the highestperfectional stage, not otherwise.The word kama-karatah is very significant. A person who knowinglyviolates the rules acts in lust. He knows that this is forbidden, stillhe acts. This is called acting whimsically. He knows that this shouldbe done, but still he does not do it; therefore he is called whimsical.Such persons are destined to be condemned by the Supreme Lord. Suchpersons cannot have the perfection which is meant for the human life.The human life is especially meant for purifying one's existence, andone who does not follow the rules and regulations cannot purifyhimself, nor can he attain the real stage of happiness.
TEXT 24
tasmac chastram pramanam te
karyakarya-vyavasthitaujnatva sastra-vidhanoktamkarma kartum iharhasi
SYNONYMStasmat--therefore; sastram--scriptures; pramanam--evidence; te--your;
karya--duty; akarya--forbidden activities; vyavasthitau--indetermining; jnatva--knowing; sastra--of scripture; vidhana--regulations; uktam--as declared; karma--work; kartum--to do; ihaarhasi--you should do it.
TRANSLATIONOne should understand what is duty and what is not duty by the
regulations of the scriptures. Knowing such rules and regulations, oneshould act so that he may gradually be elevated.
PURPORTAs stated in the Fifteenth Chapter, all the rules and regulations of
the Vedas are meant for knowing Krsna. If one understands Krsna fromthe Bhagavad-gita and becomes situated in Krsna consciousness, engaginghimself in devotional service, he has reached the highest perfection ofknowledge offered by the Vedic literature. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhumade this process very easy: He asked people simply to chant HareKrsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, RamaRama, Hare Hare and to engage in the devotional service of the Lord andeat the remnants of foodstuff offered to the Deity. One who is directlyengaged in all these devotional activities is to be understood ashaving studied all Vedic literature. He has come to the conclusionperfectly. Of course, for the ordinary persons who are not in Krsnaconsciousness or who are not engaged in devotional service, what is tobe done and what is not to be done must be decided by the injunctionsof the Vedas. One should act accordingly, without argument. That iscalled following the principles of sastra, or scripture. Sastra iswithout the four principal defects that are visible in the conditioned
soul: imperfect senses, the propensity for cheating, certainty of
committing mistakes, and certainty of being illusioned. These fourprincipal defects in conditioned life disqualify one from putting forthrules and regulations. Therefore, the rules and regulations asdescribed in the sastra--being above these defects--are acceptedwithout alteration by all great saints, acaryas and great souls.In India there are many parties of spiritual understanding, generallyclassified as two: the impersonalist and the personalist. Both of them,however, lead their lives according to the principles of the Vedas.Without following the principles of the scriptures, one cannot elevatehimself to the perfectional stage. One who actually, therefore,understands the purport of the sastras is considered fortunate.In human society, aversion to the principles of understanding theSupreme Personality of Godhead is the cause of all falldowns. That isthe greatest offense of human life. Therefore, maya, the materialenergy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is always giving ustrouble in the shape of the threefold miseries. This material energy isconstituted of the three modes of material nature. One has to raisehimself at least to the mode of goodness before the path tounderstanding the Supreme Lord can be opened. Without raising oneselfto the standard of the mode of goodness, one remains in ignorance andpassion, which are the cause of demoniac life. Those in the modes ofpassion and ignorance deride the scriptures, deride the holy man, andderide the proper understanding of the spiritual master, and they donot care for the regulations of the scriptures. In spite of hearing theglories of devotional service, they are not attracted. Thus theymanufacture their own way of elevation. These are some of the defectsof human society, which lead to the demoniac status of life. If,however, one is able to be guided by a proper and bona fide spiritualmaster, who can lead one to the path of elevation, to the higher stage,then one's life becomes successful.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Sixteenth Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of the Divine and Demoniac Natures.
Chapter 17
The Divisions of Faith
TEXT 1
arjuna uvaca
ye sastra-vidhim utsrjyayajante sraddhayanvitahtesam nistha tu ka krsnasattvam aho rajas tamah
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; ye--those; sastra-vidhim--the regulations
of scripture; utsrjya--giving up; yajante--worship; sraddhaya--fullfaith; anvitah--possessed of; tesam--of them; nistha--faith; tu--but;ka--what is that; krsna--O Krsna; sattvam--in goodness; aho--said;rajah--in passion; tamah--in ignorance.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said, O Krsna, what is the situation of one who do not follow
the principles of scripture but who worships according to his ownimagination? Is he in goodness, in passion or in ignorance?
PURPORTIn the Fourth Chapter, thirty-ninth verse, it is said that a person
faithful to a particular type of worship gradually becomes elevated tothe stage of knowledge and attains the highest perfectional stage ofpeace and prosperity. In the Sixteenth Chapter, it is concluded thatone who does not follow the principles laid down in the scriptures iscalled an asura, demon, and one who follows the scriptural injunctionsfaithfully is called a deva, or demigod. Now, if one, with faith,follows some rules which are not mentioned in the scripturalinjunctions, what is his position? This doubt of Arjuna's is to becleared by Krsna. Are those who create some sort of God by selecting ahuman being and placing their faith in him worshiping in goodness,passion or ignorance? Do such persons attain the perfectional stage oflife? Is it possible for them to be situated in real knowledge andelevate themselves to the highest perfectional stage? Do those who donot follow the rules and regulations of the scriptures but who havefaith in something and worship gods and demigods and men attain successin their effort? Arjuna is putting these questions to Krsna.
TEXT 2
sri-bhagavan uvaca
tri-vidha bhavati sraddhadehinam sa svabhava-jasattviki rajasi caivatamasi ceti tam srnu
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; tri-vidha-
-three kinds; bhavati--become; sraddha--faith; dehinam--of theembodied; sa--that; sva-bhava-ja--according to his mode of materialnature; sattviki--mode of goodness; rajasi--mode of passion; ca--also;eva--certainly; tamasi--mode of ignorance; ca--and; iti--thus; tam--that; srnu--hear from Me.
TRANSLATIONThe Supreme Lord said, according to the modes of nature acquired by the
embodied soul, one's faith can be of three kinds--goodness, passion orignorance. Now hear about these.
PURPORTThose who know the rules and regulations of the scriptures, but, out of
laziness or indolence, give up following these rules and regulationsare governed by the modes of material nature. According to theirprevious activities in the modes of goodness, passion or ignorance,they acquire a nature which is of a specific quality. The associationof the living entity with the different modes of nature has been goingon perpetually since the living entity is in contact with materialnature. Thus he acquires different types of mentality according to hisassociation with the material modes. But this nature can be changed if
one associates with a bona fide spiritual master and abides by his
rules and the scriptures. Gradually, one can change his position fromignorance to goodness, or from passion to goodness. The conclusion isthat blind faith in a particular mode of nature cannot help a personbecome elevated to the perfectional stage. One has to consider thingscarefully, with intelligence, in the association of a bona fidespiritual master. Thus one can change his position to a higher mode ofnature.
TEXT 3
sattvanurupa sarvasya
sraddha bhavati bharatasraddha-mayo 'yam purusoyo yac-chraddhah sa eva sah
SYNONYMSsattva-anurupa--according to the existence; sarvasya--of everyone;
sraddha--faith; bhavati--becomes; bharata--O son of Bharata; sraddha--faith; mayah--full; ayam--this; purusah--living entity; yah--anyone;yat--that; sraddhah--faith; sah--that; eva--certainly; sah--he.
TRANSLATIONAccording to one's existence under the various modes of nature, one
evolves a particular kind of faith. The living being is said to be of aparticular faith according to the modes he has acquired.
PURPORTEveryone has a particular type of faith, regardless of what he is. But
his faith is considered good, passionate or ignorant according to thenature he has acquired. Thus, according to his particular type offaith, one associates with certain persons. Now the real fact is thatevery living being, as is stated in the Fifteenth Chapter, isoriginally the fragmental part and parcel of the Supreme Lord.Therefore one is originally transcendental to all the modes of materialnature. But when one forgets his relationship with the SupremePersonality of Godhead and comes into contact with the material naturein conditional life, he generates his own position by association withthe different varieties of material nature. The resultant artificialfaith and existence are only material. Although one may be conducted bysome impression, or some conception of life, still, originally, he isnirguna, or transcendental. Therefore one has to become cleansed of thematerial contamination that he has acquired in order to regain hisrelationship with the Supreme Lord. That is the only path back withoutfear: Krsna consciousness. If one is situated in Krsna consciousness,then that path is guaranteed for his elevation to the perfectionalstage. If one does not take to this path of self-realization, then heis surely to be conducted by the influence of the modes of nature.The word sraddha, or faith, is very significant in this verse. Sraddhaor faith always comes out of the works of goodness. One's faith may bein a demigod or some created God or some mental concoction. It issupposed to be one's strong faith in something that is productive ofthe works of material goodness. But in material conditional life, noworks of material nature are completely purified. They are mixed. Theyare not in pure goodness. Pure goodness is transcendental; in pure
goodness one can understand the real nature of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. As long as one's faith is not completely in purifiedgoodness, the faith is subject to contamination by any of the modes ofmaterial nature. The contaminated modes of material nature expand tothe heart. Therefore according to the position of the heart in contactwith a particular mode of material nature, one's faith is established.It should be understood, that if one's heart is in the mode ofgoodness, his faith is also in the mode of goodness. If his heart is inthe mode of passion, his faith is also in the mode of passion. And ifhis heart is in the mode of darkness, illusion, his faith is also thuscontaminated. Thus we find different types of faith in this world, andthere are different types of religions due to different types of faith.The real principle of religious faith is situated in the mode of puregoodness, but because the heart is tainted, we find different types ofreligious principles. Thus according to different types of faith, thereare different kinds of worship.
TEXT 4
yajante sattvika devan
yaksa-raksamsi rajasahpretan bhuta-ganams canyeyajante tamasa janah
SYNONYMSyajante--worship; sattvikah--those who are in the mode of goodness;
devan--demigods; yaksa-raksamsi rajasah--those who are in the mode ofpassion worship demons; pretan--dead spirits; bhuta-ganan--ghosts; caanye--and others; yajante--worship; tamasah--in the mode of ignorance;janah--people.
TRANSLATIONMen in the mode of goodness worship the demigods; those in the mode of
passion worship the demons and those in the mode of ignorance worshipghosts and spirits.
PURPORTIn this verse the Supreme Personality of Godhead describes different
kinds of worshipers according to their external activities. Accordingto scriptural injunction only the Supreme Personality of Godhead isworshipable, but those who are not very conversant with, or faithfulto, the scriptural injunctions worship different objects, according totheir specific situations in the modes of material nature. Those whoare situated in goodness generally worship the demigods. The demigodsinclude Brahma, Siva and others such as Indra, Candra and the sun-god.There are various demigods. Those in goodness worship a particulardemigod for a particular purpose. Similarly, those who are in the modeof passion worship the demons. We recall that during the Second WorldWar, a man in Calcutta worshiped Hitler because thanks to that war hehad amassed a large amount of wealth by dealing in the black market.Similarly, those in the modes of passion and ignorance generally selecta powerful man to be God. They think that anyone can be worshiped asGod and that the same results will be obtained.Now, it is clearly described here that those who are in the mode ofpassion worship and create such gods, and those who are in the mode of
ignorance, in darkness, worship dead spirits. Sometimes people worship
at the tomb of some dead man. Sexual service is also considered to bein the mode of darkness. Similarly, in remote villages in India thereare worshipers of ghosts. We have seen that in India the lower-classpeople sometimes go to the forest, and if they have knowledge that aghost lives in a tree, they worship that tree and offer sacrifices.These different kinds of worship are not actually God worship. Godworship is for persons who are transcendentally situated in puregoodness. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (4.3.23) it is said, sattvamvisuddham vasudeva-sabditam: "When a man is situated in pure goodness,he worships Vasudeva." The purport is that those who are completelypurified of the material modes of nature and who are transcendentallysituated can worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead.The impersonalists are supposed to be situated in the mode of goodness,and they worship five kinds of demigods. They worship the impersonalVisnu, or the Visnu form in the material world, which is known asphilosophized Visnu. Visnu is the expansion of the Supreme Personalityof Godhead, but the impersonalists, because they do not ultimatelybelieve in the Supreme Personality of Godhead, imagine that the Visnuform is just another aspect of the impersonal Brahman; similarly, theyimagine that Lord Brahma is the impersonal form in the material mode ofpassion. Thus they sometimes describe five kinds of gods that areworshipable, but because they think that the actual truth is impersonalBrahman, they dispose of all worshipable objects at the ultimate end.In conclusion, the different qualities of the material modes of naturecan be purified through association with persons who are oftranscendental nature.
TEXTS 5-6
asastra-vihitam ghoram
tapyante ye tapo janahdambhahankara-samyuktahkama-raga-balanvitah
karsayantah sarira-stham
bhuta-gramam acetasahmam caivantah sarira-sthamtan viddhy asura-niscayan
SYNONYMSasastra--not mentioned in the scriptures; vihitam--directed; ghoram--
harmful to others; tapyante--undergo penances; ye--those; tapah--austerities; janah--persons; dambha--pride; ahankara--egoism;samyuktah--engaged; kama--lust; raga--attachment; bala--force; anvitah--impelled by; karsayantah--tormenting; sarira-stham--situated withinthe body; bhuta-gramam--combination of material elements; acetasah--bysuch a misled mentality; mam--to Me; ca--also; eva--certainly; antah--within; sarira-stham--situated in the body; tan--them; viddhi--understand; asura--demons; niscayan--certainly.
TRANSLATIONThose who undergo severe austerities and penances not recommended in
the scriptures, performing them out of pride, egoism, lust andattachment, who are impelled by passion and who torture their bodily
organs as well as the Supersoul dwelling within are to be known as
demons.
PURPORTThere are persons who manufacture modes of austerity and penances which
are not mentioned in the scriptural injunctions. For instance, fastingfor some ulterior purpose, such as to promote a purely political end isnot mentioned in the scriptural directions. The scriptures recommendfasting for spiritual advancement, not for some political end or socialpurpose. Persons who take to such austerities are, according toBhagavad-gita, certainly demoniac. Their acts are against thescriptural injunctions and are not beneficial for the people ingeneral. Actually, they act out of pride, false ego, lust andattachment for material enjoyment. By such activities, not only is thecombination of material elements of which the body is constructeddisturbed, but also the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself livingwithin the body. Such unauthorized fasting or austerities for somepolitical end are certainly very disturbing to others. They are notmentioned in the Vedic literature. A demoniac person may think that hecan force his enemy or other parties to comply with his desire by thismethod, but sometimes one dies by such fasting. These acts are notapproved by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He says that thosewho engage in them are demons. Such demonstrations are insults to theSupreme Personality of Godhead because they are enacted in disobedienceto the Vedic scriptural injunctions. The word acetasah is significantin this connection. Persons of normal mental condition must obey thescriptural injunctions. Those who are not in such a position neglectand disobey the scriptures and manufacture their own way of austeritiesand penances. One should always remember the ultimate end of thedemoniac people, as described in the previous chapter. The Lord forcesthem to take birth in the wombs of demoniac persons. Consequently theywill live by demoniac principles life after life without knowing theirrelationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If, however, suchpersons are fortunate enough to be guided by a spiritual master who candirect them to the path of Vedic wisdom, they can get out of thisentanglement and ultimately achieve the supreme goal.
TEXT 7
aharas tv api sarvasya
tri-vidho bhavati priyahyajnas tapas tatha danamtesam bhedam imam srnu
SYNONYMSaharah--eating; tu--certainly; api--also; sarvasya--of everyone; tri-
vidhah--three kinds; bhavati--there are; priyah--dear; yajnah--sacrifice; tapah--austerity; tatha--also; danam--charity; tesam--ofthem; bhedam--differences; imam--thus; srnu--hear.
TRANSLATIONEven food of which all partake is of three kinds, according to the
three modes of material nature. The same is true of sacrifices,austerities and charity. Listen, and I shall tell you of thedistinctions of these.
PURPORT
In terms of different situations in the modes of material nature, there
are differences in the manner of eating, performing sacrifices,austerities and charities. They are not all conducted on the samelevel. Those who can understand analytically what kind of performancesare in what modes of material nature are actually wise; those whoconsider all kinds of sacrifice or foods or charity to be the samecannot discriminate, and they are foolish. There are missionary workerswho advocate that one can do whatever he likes and attain perfection.But these foolish guides are not acting according to the direction ofthe scripture. They are manufacturing ways and misleading the people ingeneral.
TEXT 8-10
ayuh-sattva-balarogya-
sukha-priti-vivardhanahrasyah snigdhah sthira hrdyaaharah sattvika-priyah
katv-amla-lavanaty-usna-
tiksna-ruksa-vidahinahahara rajasasyestaduhkha-sokamaya-pradah
yata-yamam gata-rasam
puti paryusitam ca yatucchistam api camedhyambhojanam tamasa-priyam
SYNONYMSayuh--duration of life; sattva--existence; bala--strength; arogya--
health; sukha--happiness; priti--satisfaction; vivardhanah--increasing;rasyah--juicy; snigdhah--fatty; sthirah--enduring; hrdyah--pleasing tothe heart; aharah--food; sattvika--goodness; priyah--palatable. katu--bitter; amla--sour; lavana--salty; ati-usna--very hot; tiksna--pungent;ruksa--dry; vidahinah--burning; aharah--food; rajasasya--in the mode ofpassion; istah--palatable; duhkha--distress; soka--misery; amayapradah--causing disease. yata-yamam--food cooked three hours beforebeing eaten; gata-rasam--tasteless; puti--bad smelling; paryusitam--decomposed; ca--also; yat--that which; ucchistam--remnants of foodeaten by others; api--also; ca--and; amedhyam--untouchable; bhojanam--eating; tamasa--in the mode of darkness; priyam--dear.
TRANSLATIONFoods in the mode of goodness increase the duration of life, purify
one's existence and give strength, health, happiness and satisfaction.Such nourishing foods are sweet, juicy, fatty and palatable. Foods thatare too bitter, too sour, salty, pungent, dry and hot, are liked bypeople in the mode of passion. Such foods cause pain, distress, anddisease. Food cooked more than three hours before being eaten, which istasteless, stale, putrid, decomposed and unclean, is food liked bypeople in the mode of ignorance.
PURPORT
The purpose of food is to increase the duration of life, purify the
mind and aid bodily strength. This is its only purpose. In the past,great authorities selected those foods that best aid health andincrease life's duration, such as milk products, sugar, rice, wheat,fruits and vegetables. These foods are very dear to those in the modeof goodness. Some other foods, such as baked corn and molasses, whilenot very palatable in themselves, can be made pleasant when mixed withmilk or other foods. They are then in the mode of goodness. All thesefoods are pure by nature. They are quite distinct from untouchablethings like meat and liquor. Fatty foods, as mentioned in the eighthverse, have no connection with animal fat obtained by slaughter. Animalfat is available in the form of milk, which is the most wonderful ofall foods. Milk, butter, cheese and similar products give animal fat ina form which rules out any need for the killing of innocent creatures.It is only through brute mentality that this killing goes on. Thecivilized method of obtaining needed fat is by milk. Slaughter is theway of subhumans. Protein is amply available through split peas, dal,whole wheat, etc.Foods in the mode of passion, which are bitter, too salty, or too hotor overly mixed with red pepper, cause misery by producing mucus in thestomach, leading to disease. Foods in the mode of ignorance or darknessare essentially those that are not fresh. Any food cooked more thanthree hours before it is eaten (except prasadam, food offered to theLord) is considered to be in the mode of darkness. Because they aredecomposing, such foods give a bad odor, which often attracts people inthis mode but repulses those in the mode of goodness.Remnants of food may be eaten only when they are part of a meal thatwas first offered to the Supreme Lord or first eaten by saintlypersons, especially the spiritual master. Otherwise the remnants offood are considered to be in the mode of darkness, and they increaseinfection or disease. Such foodstuffs, although very palatable topersons in the mode of darkness, are neither liked nor even touched bythose in the mode of goodness. The best food is the remnants of what isoffered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In Bhagavad-gita theSupreme Lord says that He accepts preparations of vegetables, flour andmilk when offered with devotion. Patram puspam phalam toyam. Of course,devotion and love are the chief things which the Supreme Personality ofGodhead accepts. But it is also mentioned that the prasadam should beprepared in a particular way. Any food prepared by the injunctions ofthe scripture and offered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead can betaken even if prepared long, long ago, because such food istranscendental. Therefore to make food antiseptic, eatable andpalatable for all persons, one should offer food to the SupremePersonality of Godhead.
TEXT 11
aphalakanksibhir yajno
vidhi-disto ya ijyateyastavyam eveti manahsamadhaya sa sattvikah
SYNONYMSaphala-akanksibhih--devoid of desire for result; yajnah--sacrifice;
vidhi--accordingly; distah--direction; yah--anyone; ijyate--performs;
yastavyam--must be performed; eva--certainly; iti--thus; manah--mind;
samadhaya--fixed in; sah--he; sattvikah--is in the mode of goodness.
TRANSLATIONOf sacrifices, that sacrifice performed according to duty and to
scriptural rules, and with no expectation of reward, is of the natureof goodness.
PURPORTThe general tendency is to offer sacrifice with some purpose in mind,
but here it is stated that sacrifice should be performed without anysuch desire. It should be done as a matter of duty. Take, for example,the performance of rituals in temples or in churches. Generally theyare performed with the purpose of material benefit, but that is not inthe mode of goodness. One should go to a temple or church as a matterof duty, offer respect to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and offerflowers and eatables. Everyone thinks that there is no use in going tothe temple just to worship God. But worship for economic benefit is notrecommended in the scriptural injunctions. One should go simply tooffer respect to the Deity. That will place one in the mode ofgoodness. It is the duty of every civilized man to obey the injunctionsof the scriptures and offer respect to the Supreme Personality ofGodhead.
TEXT 12
abhisandhaya tu phalam
dambhartham api caiva yatijyate bharata-sresthatam yajnam viddhi rajasam
SYNONYMSabhisandhaya--desiring; tu--but; phalam--the result; dambha--pride;
artham--for the sake of; api--also; ca--and; eva--certainly; yat--thatwhich; ijyate--worship; bharata-srestha--O chief of the Bharatas; tam--that; yajnam--sacrifice; viddhi--know; rajasam--in the mode of passion.
TRANSLATIONBut that sacrifice performed for some material end or benefit or
preformed ostentatiously, out of pride, is of the nature of passion, Ochief of the Bharatas.
PURPORTSometimes sacrifices and rituals are performed for elevation to the
heavenly kingdom or for some material benefits in this world. Suchsacrifices or ritualistic performances are considered to be in the modeof passion.
TEXT 13
vidhi-hinam asrstannam
mantra-hinam adaksinamsraddha-virahitam yajnam
tamasam paricaksate
SYNONYMSvidhi-hinam--without scriptural direction; asrsta-annam--without
distribution of prasadam; mantra-hinam--with no chanting of the Vedichymns; adaksinam--with no remunerations to the priests; sraddha--faith;virahitam--without; yajnam--sacrifice; tamasam--in the mode ofignorance; paricaksate--is to be considered.
TRANSLATIONAnd that sacrifice performed in defiance of scriptural injunctions, in
which no spiritual food is distributed, no hymns are chanted and noremunerations are made to the priests, and which is faithless--thatsacrifice if of the nature of ignorance.
PURPORTFaith in the mode of darkness or ignorance is actually faithlessness.
Sometimes people worship some demigod just to make money and then spendthe money for recreation, ignoring the scriptural injunctions. Suchceremonial shows of religiosity are not accepted as genuine. They areall in the mode of darkness; they produce a demoniac mentality and donot benefit human society.
TEXT 14
deva-dvija-guru-prajna-
pujanam saucam arjavambrahmacaryam ahimsa casariram tapa ucyate
SYNONYMSdeva--the Supreme Lord; dvija--the brahmana; guru--the spiritual
master; prajna--worshipable personalities; pujanam--worship; saucam--cleanliness; arjavam--simplicity; brahmacaryam--celibacy; ahimsa--nonviolence; ca--also; sariram--pertaining to the body; tapah--austerity; ucyate--is said to be.
TRANSLATIONThe austerity of the body consists of this: worship of the Supreme
Lord, the brahmanas, the spiritual master, and superiors like thefather and mother. Cleanliness, simplicity, celibacy and nonviolenceare also austerities of the body.
PURPORTThe Supreme Godhead here explains the different kinds of austerity and
penance. First He explains the austerities and penances practiced bythe body. One should offer, or learn to offer, respect to God or to thedemigods, the perfect, qualified brahmanas and the spiritual master andsuperiors like father, mother or any person who is conversant withVedic knowledge. These should be given proper respect. One shouldpractice cleansing oneself externally and internally, and he shouldlearn to become simple in behavior. He should not do anything which is
not sanctioned by the scriptural injunctions. He should not indulge in
sex outside of married life, for sex is sanctioned in the scripturesonly in marriage, not otherwise. This is called celibacy. These arepenances and austerities as far as the body is concerned.
TEXT 15
anudvega-karam vakyam
satyam priya-hitam ca yatsvadhyayabhyasanam caivavan-mayam tapa ucyate
SYNONYMSanudvega--not agitating; karam--producing; vakyam--words; satyam--
truthful; priya--dear; hitam--beneficial; ca--also; yat--which;svadhyaya--Vedic study; abhyasanam--practice; ca--also; eva--certainly;van-mayam--of the voice; tapah--austerity; ucyate--is said to be.
TRANSLATIONAusterity of speech consists in speaking truthfully and beneficially
and in avoiding speech that offends. One should also recite the Vedasregularly.
PURPORTOne should not speak in such a way as to agitate the minds of others.
Of course, when a teacher speaks, he can speak the truth for theinstruction of his students, but such a teacher should not speak toothers who are not his students if he will agitate their minds. This ispenance as far as talking is concerned. Besides that, one should nottalk nonsense. When speaking in spiritual circles, one's statementsmust be upheld by the scriptures. One should at once quote fromscriptural authority to back up what he is saying. At the same time,such talk should be very pleasurable to the ear. By such discussions,one may derive the highest benefit and elevate human society. There isa limitless stock of Vedic literature, and one should study this. Thisis called penance of speech.
TEXT 16
manah-prasadah saumyatvam
maunam atma-vinigrahahbhava-samsuddhir ity etattapo manasam ucyate
SYNONYMSmanah-prasadah--satisfaction of the mind; saumyatvam--without duplicity
towards others; maunam--gravity; atma--self; vinigrahah--control;bhava--nature; samsuddhih--purification; iti--thus; etat--that is;tapah--austerity; manasam--of the mind; ucyate--is said to be.
TRANSLATIONAnd satisfaction, simplicity, gravity, self-control and purity of
thought are the austerities of the mind.
PURPORT
To make the mind austere is to detach it from sense gratification. It
should be so trained that it can be always thinking of doing good forothers. The best training for the mind is gravity in thought. Oneshould not deviate from Krsna consciousness and must always avoid sensegratification. To purify one's nature is to become Krsna conscious.Satisfaction of the mind can be obtained only by taking the mind awayfrom thoughts of sense enjoyment. The more we think of sense enjoyment,the more the mind becomes dissatisfied. In the present age weunnecessarily engage the mind in so many different ways for sensegratification, and so there is no possibility of the mind's becomingsatisfied. The best course is to divert the mind to the Vedicliterature, which is full of satisfying stories, as in the Puranas andthe Mahabharata. One can take advantage of this knowledge and thusbecome purified. The mind should be devoid of duplicity, and one shouldthink of the welfare of all. Silence means that one is always thinkingof self-realization. The person in Krsna consciousness observes perfectsilence in this sense. Control of the mind means detaching the mindfrom sense enjoyment. One should be straightforward in his dealings andthereby purify his existence. All these qualities together constituteausterity in mental activities.
TEXT 17
sraddhaya paraya taptam
tapas tat tri-vidham naraihaphalakanksibhir yuktaihsattvikam paricaksate
SYNONYMSsraddhaya--with faith; paraya--transcendental; taptam--execution;
tapah--austerity; tat--that; tri-vidham--three kinds; naraih--by men;aphala-akanksibhih--without desires for fruits; yuktaih--engaged;sattvikam--in the mode of goodness; paricaksate--is called.
TRANSLATIONThis threefold austerity, practiced by men whose aim is not to benefit
themselves materially but to please the Supreme, is of the nature ofgoodness.
TEXT 18
satkara-mana-pujartham
tapo dambhena caiva yatkriyate tad iha proktamrajasam calam adhruvam
SYNONYMSsat-kara--respect; mana--honor; puja-artham--for worship; tapah--
austerity; dambhena--pride; ca--also; eva--certainly; yat--which is;kriyate--performed; tat--that; iha--in this world; proktam--is said;rajasam--in the mode of passion; calam--flickering; adhruvam--temporary.
TRANSLATION
Those ostentatious penances and austerities which are performed in
order to gain respect, honor and worship are said to be in the mode ofpassion. They are neither stable nor permanent.
PURPORTSometimes penance and austerity are executed to attract people and
receive honor, respect and worship from others. Persons in the mode ofpassion arrange to be worshiped by subordinates and let them wash theirfeet and offer riches. Such arrangements artificially made by theperformance of penances are considered to be in the mode of passion.The results are temporary; they can be continued for some time, butthey are not permanent.
TEXT 19
mudha-grahenatmano yat
pidaya kriyate tapahparasyotsadanartham vatat tamasam udahrtam
SYNONYMSmudha--foolish; grahena--with endeavor; atmanah--of one's own self;
yat--which; pidaya--by torture; kriyate--is performed; tapah--penance;parasya--to others; utsadana-artham--causing annihilation; va--or; tat--that; tamasam--in the mode of darkness; udahrtam--is said to be.
TRANSLATIONAnd those penances and austerities which are performed foolishly by
means of obstinate self-torture, or to destroy or injure others, aresaid to be in the mode of ignorance.
PURPORTThere are instances of foolish penance undertaken by demons like
Hiranyakasipu, who performed austere penances to become immortal andkill the demigods. He prayed to Brahma for such things, but ultimatelyhe was killed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. To undergopenances for something which is impossible is certainly in the mode ofignorance.
TEXT 20
datavyam iti yad danam
diyate 'nupakarinedese kale ca patre catad danam sattvikam smrtam
SYNONYMSdatavyam--worth giving; iti--thus; yat--that which; danam--charity;
diyate--given; anupakarine--to any person irrespective of doing good;dese--in place; kale--in time; ca--also; patre--suitable person; ca--
and; tat--that; danam--charity; sattvikam--in the mode of goodness;
smrtam--consider.
TRANSLATIONThat gift which is given out of duty, at the proper time and place, to
a worthy person, and without expectation of return, is considered to becharity in the mode of goodness.
PURPORTIn the Vedic literature, charity given to a person engaged in spiritual
activities is recommended. There is no recommendation for givingcharity indiscriminately. Spiritual perfection is always aconsideration. Therefore charity is recommended to be given at a placeof pilgrimage and at lunar or solar eclipses or at the end of the monthor to a qualified brahmana or a Vaisnava (devotee) or in temples. Suchcharities should be given without any consideration of return. Charityto the poor is sometimes given out of compassion, but if a poor man isnot worth giving charity to, then there is no spiritual advancement. Inother words, indiscriminate charity is not recommended in the Vedicliterature.
TEXT 21
yat tu pratyupakarartham
phalam uddisya va punahdiyate ca pariklistamtad danam rajasam smrtam
SYNONYMSyat--that which; tu--but; prati-upakara-artham--for the sake of getting
some return; phalam--result; uddisya--desiring; va--or; punah--again;diyate--is given in charity; ca--also; pariklistam--grudgingly; tat--that; danam--charity; rajasam--in the mode of passion; smrtam--isunderstood to be.
TRANSLATIONBut charity performed with the expectation of some return, or with a
desire for fruitive results, or in a grudging mood, is said to becharity in the mode of passion.
PURPORTCharity is sometimes performed for elevation to the heavenly kingdom
and sometimes with great trouble and with repentance afterwards. "Whyhave I spent so much in this way?" Charity is also sometimes givenunder some obligation, at the request of a superior. These kinds ofcharity are said to be in the mode of passion.There are many charitable foundations which offer their gifts toinstitutions where sense gratification goes on. Such charities are notrecommended in the Vedic scripture. Only charity in the mode ofgoodness is recommended.
TEXT 22
adesa-kale yad danam
apatrebhyas ca diyateasat-krtam avajnatamtat tamasam udahrtam
SYNONYMSadesa--unpurified place; kale--unpurified time; yat--that which; danam-
-charity; upatrebhyah--to unworthy persons; ca--also; diyate--is given;asat-krtam--without respect; avajnatam--without proper attention; tat--that; tamasam--in the mode of darkness; udahrtam--is said to be.
TRANSLATIONAnd charity performed at an improper place and time and given to
unworthy persons without respect and with contempt is charity in themode of ignorance.
PURPORTContributions for indulgence in intoxication and gambling are not
encouraged here. That sort of contribution is in the mode of ignorance.Such charity is not beneficial; rather, sinful persons are encouraged.Similarly, if a person gives charity to a suitable person withoutrespect and without attention, that sort of charity is also said to bein the mode of darkness.
TEXT 23
om tat sad iti nirdeso
brahmanas tri-vidhah smrtahbrahmanas tena vedas cayajnas ca vihitah pura
SYNONYMSom--indication of the Supreme; tat--that; sat--eternal; iti--that;
nirdesah--indication; brahmanah--of the Supreme; tri-vidhah--threekinds; smrtah--consider; brahmanah--the brahmanas; tena--therefore;vedah--the Vedic literature; ca--also; yajnah--sacrifice; ca--also;vihitah--used; pura--formerly.
TRANSLATIONFrom the beginning of creation, the three syllables--om tat sat--have
been used to indicate the Supreme Absolute Truth [Brahman]. They wereuttered by brahmanas while chanting Vedic hymns and during sacrifices,for the satisfaction of the Supreme.
PURPORTIt has been explained that penance, sacrifice, charity and foods are
divided into three categories: the modes of goodness, passion andignorance. But whether first class, second class or third class, theyare all conditioned, contaminated by the material modes of nature. Whenthey are aimed at the Supreme--om tat sat, the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, the eternal--they become means for spiritual elevation. In thescriptural injunctions such an objective is indicated. These three
words, om tat sat, particularly indicate the Absolute Truth, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the Vedic hymns, the word om isalways found.One who acts without following the regulations of the scriptures willnot attain the Absolute Truth. He will get some temporary result, butnot the ultimate end of life. The conclusion is that the performance ofcharity, sacrifice and penance must be done in the mode of goodness.Performed in the mode of passion and ignorance, they are certainlyinferior in quality. The three words om tat sat are uttered inconjunction with the holy name of the Supreme Lord, e.g., om tadvisnoh. Whenever a Vedic hymn or the holy name of the Supreme Lord isuttered, om is added. This is the indication of Vedic literature. Thesethree words are taken from Vedic hymns. Om ity etad brahmano nedisthamnama (Rg Veda) indicates the first goal. Then tat tvam asi (ChandogyaUpanisad 6.8.7) indicates the second goal. And sad eva saumya(Chandogya Upanisad 6.2.1) indicates the third goal. Combined theybecome om tat sat. Formerly when Brahma, the first created livingentity, performed sacrifices, he spoke these three names of the SupremePersonality of Godhead. The same principle holds by disciplicsuccession. So this hymn has great significance. Bhagavad-gitarecommends, therefore, that any work done should be done for om tatsat, or for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When one performspenance, charity, and sacrifice with these three words, he is acting inKrsna consciousness. Krsna consciousness is a scientific execution oftranscendental activities which enables one to return home, back toGodhead. There is no loss of energy in acting in such a transcendentalway.
TEXT 24
tasmad om ity udahrtya
yajna-dana-tapah-kriyahpravartante vidhanoktahsatatam brahma-vadinam
SYNONYMStasmat--therefore; om--beginning with om; iti--thus; udahrtya--
indicating; yajna--sacrifice; dana--charity; tapah--penance; kriyah--performances; pravartante--begin; vidhana-uktah--according toscriptural regulation; satatam--always; brahma-vadinam--of thetranscendentalists.
TRANSLATIONThus the transcendentalists undertake sacrifices, charities, and
penances, beginning always with om, to attain the Supreme.
PURPORTOm tad visnoh paramam padam (Rg Veda 1.22.20). The lotus feet of Visnu
are the supreme devotional platform. The performance of everything onbehalf of the Supreme Personality of Godhead assures the perfection ofall activity.
TEXT 25
tad ity anabhisandhaya
phalam yajna-tapah-kriyah
dana-kriyas ca vividhahkriyante moksa-kanksibhih
SYNONYMStat--that; iti--they; anabhisandhaya--without fruitive result; phalam--
result of sacrifice; yajna--sacrifice; tapah--penance; kriyah--activities; dana--charity; kriyah--activities; ca--also; vividhah--varieties; kriyante--done; moksa-kanksibhih--those who actually desireliberation.
TRANSLATIONOne should perform sacrifice, penance and charity with the word tat.
The purpose of such transcendental activities is to get free from thematerial entanglement.
PURPORTTo be elevated to the spiritual position, one should not act for any
material gain. Acts should be performed for the ultimate gain of beingtransferred to the spiritual kingdom, back to home, back to Godhead.
TEXTS 26-27
sad-bhave sadhu-bhave ca
sad ity etat prayujyateprasaste karmani tathasac-chabdah partha yujyate
yajne tapasi dane ca
sthitih sad iti cocyatekarma caiva tad-arthiyamsad ity evabhidhiyate
SYNONYMSsat-bhave--in the sense of the nature of the Supreme; sadhu-bhave--in
the sense of the nature of devotion; ca--also; sat--the supreme; iti--thus; etat--this; prayujyate--is used; prasaste--bona fide; karmani--activities; tatha--also; sat-sabdah--the sound sat; partha--O son ofPrtha; yujyate--is used; yajne--sacrifice; tapasi--in penance; dane--charity; ca--also; sthitih--situated; sat--the Supreme; iti--thus; ca--and; ucyate--pronounced; karma--work; ca--also; eva--certainly; tat--that; arthiyam--are meant; sat--Supreme; iti--thus; eva--certainly;abhidhiyate--is practiced.
TRANSLATIONThe Absolute Truth is the objective of devotional sacrifice, and it is
indicated by the word sat. These works of sacrifice, of penance and ofcharity, true to the absolute nature, are performed to please theSupreme Person, O son of Prtha.
PURPORT
The words prasaste karmani, or prescribed duties, indicate that there
are many activities prescribed in the Vedic literature which arepurificatory processes beginning from the parental care up to the endof one's life. Such purificatory processes are adopted for the ultimateliberation of the living entity. In all such activities it isrecommended that one should vibrate om tat sat. The words sad-bhave andsadhu-bhave indicate the transcendental situation. One who is acting inKrsna consciousness is called sattva, and one who is fully conscious ofthe activities in Krsna consciousness is called a sadhu. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.25.25) it is said that the transcendental subject matterbecomes clear in the association of the devotees. Without goodassociation one cannot achieve transcendental knowledge. Wheninitiating a person or offering the sacred thread, one vibrates thewords om tat sat. Similarly, in all kinds of yajna performances, thesupreme object, om tat sat is invoked. These words om tat sat are usedto perfect all activities. The supreme om tat sat makes everythingcomplete.
TEXT 28
asraddhaya hutam dattam
tapas taptam krtam ca yatasad ity ucyate parthana ca tat pretya no iha
SYNONYMSasraddhaya--without faith; hutam--offered in sacrifice; dattam--given;
tapah--penance; taptam--executed; krtam--performed; ca--also; yat--thatwhich; asat--false; iti--thus; ucyate--is said to be; partha--O son ofPrtha; na--never; ca--also; tat--that; pretya--after death; no--nor;iha--in this life.
TRANSLATIONBut sacrifices, austerities and charities performed without faith in
the Supreme are nonpermanent, O son of Prtha, regardless of whateverrites are performed. They are called asat and are useless both in thislife and the next.
PURPORTAnything done without the transcendental objective--whether it be
sacrifice, charity or penance--is useless. Therefore, in this verse, itis declared that such activities are abominable. Everything should bedone for the Supreme in Krsna consciousness. Without such faith, andwithout the proper guidance, there can never be any fruit. In all theVedic scriptures, faith in the Supreme is advised. In the pursuit ofall Vedic instructions, the ultimate goal is the understanding ofKrsna. No one can obtain success without following this principle.Therefore, the best course is to work from the very beginning in Krsnaconsciousness under the guidance of a bona fide spiritual master. Thatis the way to make everything successful.In the conditional state, people are attracted to worship demigods,ghosts, or Yaksas like Kuvera. The mode of goodness is better than themodes of passion and ignorance, but one who takes directly to Krsnaconsciousness is transcendental to all three modes of material nature.Although there is a process of gradual elevation, if one, by the
association of pure devotees, takes directly to Krsna consciousness,
that is the best way. And that is recommended in this chapter. Toachieve success in this way, one must first find the proper spiritualmaster and receive training under his direction. Then one can achievefaith in the Supreme. When that faith matures, in course of time, it iscalled love of God. This love is the ultimate goal of the livingentities. One should, therefore, take to Krsna consciousness directly.That is the message of this Seventeenth Chapter.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Seventeenth Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of the Divisions of Faith.
Chapter 18
Conclusion--The Perfection of Renunciation
TEXT 1
arjuna uvaca
sannyasasya maha-bahotattvam icchami veditumtyagasya ca hrsikesaprthak kesi-nisudana
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; sannyasasya--renunciation; maha-baho--O
mighty-armed one; tattvam--truth; icchami--I wish; veditum--tounderstand; tyagasya--of renunciation; ca--also; hrsikesa--O master ofthe senses; prthak--differently; kesi-nisudana--O killer of the Kesidemon.
TRANSLATIONArjuna said, O mighty-armed one, I wish to understand the purpose of
renunciation [tyaga] and of the renounced order of life [sannyasa], Okiller of the Kesi demon, Hrsikesa.
PURPORTActually the Bhagavad-gita is finished in seventeen chapters. The
Eighteenth Chapter is a supplementary summarization of the topicsdiscussed before. In every chapter of Bhagavad-gita, Lord Krsnastresses that devotional service unto the Supreme Personality ofGodhead is the ultimate goal of life. This same point is summarized inthe Eighteenth Chapter as the most confidential path of knowledge. Inthe first six chapters, stress was given to devotional service: yoginamapi sarvesam... "Of all yogis or transcendentalists, one who alwaysthinks of Me within himself is best." In the next six chapters, puredevotional service and its nature and activity were discussed. In thethird six chapters, knowledge, renunciation, the activities of materialnature and transcendental nature, and devotional service weredescribed. It was concluded that all acts should be performed inconjunction with the Supreme Lord, summarized by the words om tat sat,which indicate Visnu, the Supreme Person. In the third part ofBhagavad-gita, devotional service was established by the example ofpast acaryas and the Brahma-sutra, the Vedanta-sutra, which cites thatdevotional service is the ultimate purpose of life and nothing else.Certain impersonalists consider themselves monopolizers of the
knowledge of Vedanta-sutra, but actually the Vedanta-sutra is meant for
understanding devotional service, for the Lord Himself is the composerof the Vedanta-sutra, and He is its knower. That is described in theFifteenth Chapter. In every scripture, every Veda, devotional serviceis the objective. That is explained in Bhagavad-gita.As in the Second Chapter a synopsis of the whole subject matter wasdescribed, similarly, in the Eighteenth Chapter also the summary of allinstruction is given. The purpose of life is indicated to berenunciation and attainment of the transcendental position above thethree material modes of nature. Arjuna wants to clarify the twodistinct subject matters of Bhagavad-gita, namely renunciation (tyaga)and the renounced order of life (sannyasa). Thus he is asking themeaning of these two words.Two words used in this verse to address the Supreme Lord--Hrsikesa andKesi-nisudana--are significant. Hrsikesa is Krsna, the master of allsenses, who can always help us attain mental serenity. Arjuna requestsHim to summarize everything in such a way that he can remainequipoised. Yet he has some doubts, and doubts are always compared todemons. He therefore addresses Krsna as Kesi-nisudana. Kesi was a mostformidable demon who was killed by the Lord; now Arjuna is expectingKrsna to kill the demon of doubt.
TEXT 2
sri-bhagavan uvaca
kamyanam karmanam nyasamsannyasam kavayo viduhsarva-karma-phala-tyagamprahus tyagam vicaksanah
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; kamyanam--
with desire; karmanam--activities; nyasam--renunciation; sannyasam--renounced order of life; kavayah--the learned; viduh--know; sarva--ofall; karma--activities; phala--of results; tyagam--renunciation;prahuh--call; tyagam--renunciation; vicaksanah--the experienced.
TRANSLATIONThe Supreme Lord said, to give up the results of all activities is
called renunciation [tyaga] by the wise. And that state is called therenounced order of life [sannyasa] by great learned men.
PURPORTThe performance of activities for results has to be given up. This is
the instruction of Bhagavad-gita. But activities leading to advancedspiritual knowledge are not to be given up. This will be made clear inthe next verse. There are many prescriptions of methods for performingsacrifice for some particular purpose in the Vedic literatures. Thereare certain sacrifices to perform to attain a good son or to attainelevation to the higher planets, but sacrifices prompted by desiresshould be stopped. However, sacrifice for the purification of one'sheart or for advancement in the spiritual science should not be givenup.
TEXT 3
tyajyam dosa-vad ity eke
karma prahur manisinahyajna-dana-tapah-karmana tyajyam iti capare
SYNONYMStyajyam--must be given up; dosa-vat--as an evil; iti--thus; eke--one
group; karma--work; prahuh--said; manisinah--of great thinkers; yajna--sacrifice; dana--charity; tapah--penance; karma--work; na--never;tyajyam--is to be given up; iti--thus; ca--certainly; apare--others.
TRANSLATIONSome learned men declare that all kinds of fruitive activities should
be given up, but there are yet other sages who maintain that acts ofsacrifice, charity and penance should never be abandoned.
PURPORTThere are many activities in the Vedic literatures which are subjects
of contention. For instance, it is said that an animal can be killed ina sacrifice, yet some maintain animal killing is completely abominable.Although animal killing in a sacrifice is recommended in the Vedicliterature, the animal is not considered to be killed. The sacrifice isto give a new life to the animal. Sometimes the animal is given a newanimal life after being killed in the sacrifice, and sometimes theanimal is promoted immediately to the human form of life. But there aredifferent opinions among the sages. Some say that animal killing shouldalways be avoided, and others say that for a specific sacrifice it isgood. All these different opinions on sacrificial activity are nowbeing clarified by the Lord Himself.
TEXT 4
niscayam srnu me tatra
tyage bharata-sattamatyago hi purusa-vyaghratri-vidhah samprakirtitah
SYNONYMSniscayam--certainty; srnu--hear; me--from Me; tatra--there; tyage--in
the matter of renunciation; bharata-sat-tama--O best of the Bharatas;tyagah--renunciation; hi--certainly; purusa-vyaghra--O tiger amonghuman beings; tri-vidhah--three kinds; samprakirtitah--is declared.
TRANSLATIONO best of the Bharatas, hear from Me now about renunciation. O tiger
among men, there are three kinds of renunciation declared in thescriptures.
PURPORTAlthough there are differences of opinion about renunciation, here the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, gives His judgment, which
should be taken as final. After all, the Vedas are different laws given
by the Lord. Here the Lord is personally present, and His word shouldbe taken as final. The Lord says that the process of renunciationshould be considered in terms of the modes of material nature in whichthey are performed.
TEXT 5
yajna-dana-tapah-karma
na tyajyam karyam eva tatyajno danam tapas caivapavanani manisinam
SYNONYMSyajna--sacrifice; dana--charity; tapah--penance; karma--activities; na-
-never; tyajyam--to be given up; karyam--must be done; eva--certainly;tat--that; yajnah--sacrifice; danam--charity; tapah--penance; ca--also;eva--certainly; pavanani--purifying; manisinam--even of the greatsouls.
TRANSLATIONActs of sacrifice, charity and penance are not to be given up but
should be performed. Indeed, sacrifice, charity and penance purify eventhe great souls.
PURPORTThe yogis should perform acts for the advancement of human society.
There are many purificatory processes for advancing a human being tospiritual life. The marriage ceremony, for example, is considered to beone of these sacrifices. It is called vivaha-yajna. Should a sannyasi,who is in the renounced order of life and who has given up his familyrelations, encourage the marriage ceremony? The Lord says here that anysacrifice which is meant for human welfare should never be given up.Vivaha-yajna, the marriage ceremony, is meant to regulate the humanmind to become peaceful for spiritual advancement. For most men, thisvivaha-yajna should be encouraged even by persons in the renouncedorder of life. Sannyasis should never associate with women, but thatdoes not mean that one who is in the lower stages of life, a young man,should not accept a wife in the marriage ceremony. All prescribedsacrifices are meant for achieving the Supreme Lord. Therefore, in thelower stages, they should not be given up. Similarly, charity is forthe purification of the heart. If charity is given to suitable persons,as described previously, it leads one to advanced spiritual life.
TEXT 6
etany api tu karmani
sangam tyaktva phalani cakartavyaniti me parthaniscitam matam uttamam
SYNONYMSetani--all this; api--certainly; tu--must; karmani--activities; sangam-
-association; tyaktva--renouncing; phalani--results; ca--also;
kartavyani--as duty; iti--thus; me--My; partha--O son of Prtha;
niscitam--definite; matam--opinion; uttamam--the best.
TRANSLATION
All these activities should be performed without any expectation of
result. They should be performed as a matter of duty, O son of Prtha.That is My final opinion.
PURPORTAlthough all sacrifices are purifying, one should not expect any result
by such performances. In other words, all sacrifices which are meantfor material advancement in life should be given up, but sacrificesthat purify one's existence and elevate one to the spiritual planeshould not be stopped. Everything that leads to Krsna consciousnessmust be encouraged. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam also it is said that anyactivity which leads to devotional service to the Lord should beaccepted. That is the highest criterion of religion. A devotee of theLord should accept any kind of work, sacrifice or charity which willhelp him in the discharge of devotional service to the Lord.
TEXT 7
niyatasya tu sannyasah
karmano nopapadyatemohat tasya parityagastamasah parikirtitah
SYNONYMSniyatasya--prescribed duties; tu--but; sannyasah--renunciation;
karmanah--activities; na--never; upapadyate--is deserved; mohat--byillusion; tasya--of which; parityagah--renunciation; tamasah--in themode of ignorance; parikirtitah--is declared.
TRANSLATIONPrescribed duties should never be renounced. If, by illusion, one gives
up his prescribed duties, such renunciation is said to be in the modeof ignorance.
PURPORTWork for material satisfaction must be given up, but activities which
promote one to spiritual activity, like cooking for the Supreme Lordand offering the food to the Lord and then accepting the food, arerecommended. It is said that a person in the renounced order of lifeshould not cook for himself. Cooking for oneself is prohibited, butcooking for the Supreme Lord is not prohibited. Similarly, a sannyasimay perform a marriage ceremony to help his disciple in the advancementof Krsna consciousness. If one renounces such activities, it is to beunderstood that he is acting in the mode of darkness.
TEXT 8
duhkham ity eva yat karma
kaya-klesa-bhayat tyajet
sa krtva rajasam tyagamnaiva tyaga-phalam labhet
SYNONYMSduhkham--unhappy; iti--thus; eva--certainly; yat--that which; karma--
work; kaya--body; klesa--troublesome; bhayat--out of fear; tyajet--gives up; sah--that; krtva--after doing; rajasam--in the mode ofpassion; tyagam--renunciation; na eva--certainly not; tyaga--renounced;phalam--results; labhet--gain.
TRANSLATIONAnyone who gives up prescribed duties as troublesome, or out of fear,
is said to be in the mode of passion. Such action never leads to theelevation of renunciation.
PURPORTOne who is in Krsna consciousness should not give up earning money out
of fear that he is performing fruitive activities. If by working onecan engage his money in Krsna consciousness, or if by rising early inthe morning one can advance his transcendental Krsna consciousness, oneshould not desist out of fear or because such activities are consideredtroublesome. Such renunciation is in the mode of passion. The result ofpassionate work is always miserable. Even if a person renounces work inthat spirit, he never gets the result of renunciation.
TEXT 9
karyam ity eva yat karma
niyatam kriyate 'rjunasangam tyaktva phalam caivasa tyagah sattviko matah
SYNONYMSkaryam--must be done; iti--thus; eva--thus; yat--that which; karma--
work; niyatam--prescribed; kriyate--performed; arjuna--O Arjuna;sangam--association; tyaktva--giving up; phalam--result; ca--also; eva--certainly; sah--that; tyagah--renunciation; sattvikah--in the mode ofgoodness; matah--in My opinion.
TRANSLATIONBut he who performs his prescribed duty only because it ought to be
done, and renounces all attachment to the fruit--his renunciation is ofthe nature of goodness, O Arjuna.
PURPORTPrescribed duties must be performed with this mentality. One should act
without attachment for the result; he should be disassociated from themodes of work. A man working in Krsna consciousness in a factory doesnot associate himself with the work of the factory, nor with theworkers of the factory. He simply works for Krsna. And when he gives upthe result for Krsna, he is acting transcendentally.
TEXT 10
na dvesty akusalam karma
kusale nanusajjatetyagi sattva-samavistomedhavi chinna-samsayah
SYNONYMSna--never; dvesti--hates; akusalam--inauspicious; karma--work; kusale--
in the auspicious; na--nor; anusajjate--becomes attached; tyagi--therenouncer; sattva--goodness; samavistah--absorbed in; medhavi--intelligent; chinna--cut up; samsayah--all doubts.
TRANSLATIONThose who are situated in the mode of goodness, who neither hate
inauspicious work nor are attached to auspicious work, have no doubtsabout work.
PURPORTA person in Krsna consciousness or in the mode of goodness does not
hate anyone or anything which troubles his body. He does work in theproper place and at the proper time without fearing the troublesomeeffects of his duty. Such a person situated in transcendence should beunderstood to be most intelligent and beyond all doubts in hisactivities.
TEXT 11
na hi deha-bhrta sakyam
tyaktum karmany asesatahyas tu karma-phala-tyagisa tyagity abhidhiyate
SYNONYMSna--never; hi--certainly; deha-bhrta--of the embodied; sakyam--
possible; tyaktum--to renounce; karmani--activities of; asesatah--altogether; yah tu--anyone who; karma--work; phala--results; tyagi--renouncer; sah--he; tyagi--the renouncer; iti--thus; abhidhiyate--it issaid.
TRANSLATIONIt is indeed impossible for an embodied being to give up all
activities. Therefore it is said that he who renounces the fruits ofaction is one who has truly renounced.
PURPORTIt is said in Bhagavad-gita that one can never give up work at any
time. Therefore he who works for Krsna and does not enjoy the fruitiveresults, who offers everything to Krsna, is actually a renouncer. Thereare many members of the International Society for Krishna Consciousnesswho work very hard in their office or in the factory or some other
place, and whatever they earn they give to the Society. Such highly
elevated souls are actually sannyasis and are situated in the renouncedorder of life. It is clearly outlined here how to renounce the fruitsof work and for what purpose fruits should be renounced.
TEXT 12
anistam istam misram ca
tri-vidham karmanah phalambhavaty atyaginam pretyana tu sannyasinam kvacit
SYNONYMSanistam--leading to hell; istam--leading to heaven; misram ca--or
mixture; tri-vidham--three kinds; karmanah--work; phalam--result;bhavati--becomes; atyaginam--of the renouncer; pretya--after death; natu--but not; sannyasinam--of the renounced order; kvacit--at any time.
TRANSLATIONFor one who is not renounced, the threefold fruits of action--
desirable, undesirable and mixed--accrue after death. But those who arein the renounced order of life have no such results to suffer or enjoy.
PURPORTA person in Krsna consciousness acting in knowledge of his relationship
with Krsna is always liberated. Therefore he does not have to enjoy orsuffer the results of his acts after death.
TEXT 13
pancaitani maha-baho
karanani nibodha mesankhye krtante proktanisiddhaye sarva-karmanam
adhisthanam tatha karta
karanam ca prthag-vidhamvividhas ca prthak cestadaivam caivatra pancamam
SYNONYMSpanca--five; etani--all these; maha-baho--O mighty-armed one; karanani-
-cause; nibodha--just understand; me--from Me; sankhye--in the Vedas;krta-ante--after performance; proktani--said; siddhaye--perfection;sarva--all; karmanam--actuated. adhisthanam--place; tatha--also; karta--worker; karanam ca--and instruments; prthak-vidham--different kinds;vividhah ca--varieties; prthak--separately; cestah--endeavor; daivam--the Supreme; ca--also; eva--certainly; atra--here; pancamam--five.
TRANSLATIONO mighty-armed Arjuna, learn from Me of the five factors which bring
about the accomplishment of all action. These are declared in sankhya
philosophy to be the place of action, the performer, the senses, the
endeavor, and ultimately the Supersoul.
PURPORTA question may be raised that since any activity performed must have
some reaction, how is it that the person in Krsna consciousness doesnot suffer or enjoy the reactions of work? The Lord is citing Vedantaphilosophy to show how this is possible. He says that there are fivecauses for all activities, and for success in all activity, one shouldknow these five causes. Sankhya means the stalk of knowledge, andVedanta is the final stalk of knowledge accepted by all leadingacaryas. Even Sankara accepts Vedanta-sutra as such. Therefore suchauthority should be consulted.The ultimate will is invested in the Supersoul, as it is stated in theGita, sarvasya caham hrdi sannivistah. He is engaging everyone incertain activities. Acts done under His direction from within yield noreaction, either in this life or in the life after death.The instruments of action are the senses, and by senses the soul actsin various ways, and for each and every action there is a differentendeavor. But all one's activities depend on the will of the Supersoul,who is seated within the heart as a friend. The Supreme Lord is thesupercause. Under these circumstances, he who is acting in Krsnaconsciousness under the direction of the Supersoul situated within theheart is naturally not bound by any activity. Those in complete Krsnaconsciousness are not ultimately responsible for their actions.Everything is dependent on the supreme will, the Supersoul, the SupremePersonality of Godhead.
TEXT 15
sarira-van-manobhir yat
karma prarabhate narahnyayyam va viparitam vapancaite tasya hetavah
SYNONYMSsarira--body; vak--speech; manobhih--by the mind; yat--anything; karma-
-work; prarabhate--begins; narah--a person; nyayyam--right; va--or;viparitam--the opposite; va--or; panca--five; ete--all these; tasya--its; hetavah--causes.
TRANSLATIONWhatever right or wrong action a man performs by body, mind or speech
is caused by these five factors.
PURPORTThe words "right" and "wrong" are very significant in this verse. Right
work is work done in terms of the prescribed directions in thescriptures, and wrong work is work done against the principles of thescriptural injunctions. But whatever is done requires these fivefactors for its complete performance.
TEXT 16
tatraivam sati kartaram
atmanam kevalam tu yahpasyaty akrta-buddhitvanna sa pasyati durmatih
SYNONYMStatra--there; evam--certainly; sati--being; kartaram--of the worker;
atmanam--the self; kevalam--only; tu--but; yah--anyone; pasyati--sees;akrta-buddhitvat--due to unintelligence; na--never; sah--he; pasyati--sees; durmatih--foolish.
TRANSLATIONTherefore one who thinks himself the only doer, not considering the
five factors, is certainly not very intelligent and cannot see thingsas they are.
PURPORTA foolish person cannot understand that the Supersoul is sitting as a
friend within and conducting his actions. Although the material causesare the place, the worker, the endeavor and the senses, the final causeis the Supreme, the Personality of Godhead. Therefore, one should seenot only the four material causes, but the supreme efficient cause aswell. One who does not see the Supreme thinks himself to be the doer.
TEXT 17
yasya nahankrto bhavo
buddhir yasya na lipyatehatvapi sa imal lokanna hanti na nibadhyate
SYNONYMSyasya--of one who; na--never; ahankrtah--false ego; bhavah--nature;
buddhih--intelligence; yasya--one who; na--never; lipyate--is attached;hatva api--even killing; sah--he; iman--this; lokan--world; na--never;hanti--kills; na--never; nibadhyate--becomes entangled.
TRANSLATIONOne who is not motivated by false ego, whose intelligence is not
entangled, though he kills men in this world, is not the slayer. Nor ishe bound by his actions.
PURPORTIn this verse the Lord informs Arjuna that the desire not to fight
arises from false ego. Arjuna thought himself to be the doer of action,but he did not consider the supreme sanction within and without. If onedoes not know that a supersanction is there, why should he act? But onewho knows the instrument of work, himself as the worker, and theSupreme Lord as the supreme sanctioner is perfect in doing everything.Such a person is never in illusion. Personal activity andresponsibility arise from false ego and godlessness, or a lack of Krsnaconsciousness. Anyone who is acting in Krsna consciousness under the
direction of the Supersoul or the Supreme Personality of Godhead, even
though killing, does not kill. Nor is he ever affected with thereaction of such killing. When a soldier kills under the command of asuperior officer, he is not subject to be judged. But if a soldierkills on his own personal account, then he is certainly judged by acourt of law.
TEXT 18
jnanam jneyam parijnata
tri-vidha karma-codanakaranam karma kartetitri-vidhah karma-sangrahah
SYNONYMSjnanam--knowledge; jneyam--objective; parijnata--the knower; tri-vidha-
-three kinds; karma--work; codana--impetus; karanam--the senses; karma--work; karta--the doer; iti--thus; tri-vidhah--three kinds; karma--work; sangrahah--accumulation.
TRANSLATIONKnowledge, the object of knowledge and the knower are the three factors
which motivate action; the senses, the work and the doer comprise thethreefold basis of action.
PURPORTThere are three kinds of impetus for daily work: knowledge, the object
of knowledge and the knower. The instruments of work, the work itselfand the worker are called the constituents of work. Any work done byany human being has these elements. Before one acts, there is someimpetus, which is called inspiration. Any solution arrived at beforework is actualized is a subtle form of work. Then work takes the formof action. First one has to undergo the psychological processes ofthinking, feeling and willing, and that is called impetus. Actually thefaith to perform acts is called knowledge. The inspiration to work isthe same if it comes from the scripture or from the instruction of thespiritual master. When the inspiration is there and the worker isthere, then actual activity takes place by the help of the senses. Themind is the center of all senses, and the object is work itself. Theseare the different phases of work as described in Bhagavad-gita. The sumtotal of all activities is called accumulation of work.
TEXT 19
jnanam karma ca karta ca
tridhaiva guna-bhedatahprocyate guna-sankhyaneyathavac chrnu tany api
SYNONYMSjnanam--knowledge; karma--work; ca--also; karta--worker; ca--also;
tridha--three kinds; eva--certainly; guna-bhedatah--in terms ofdifferent modes of material nature; procyate--is said; guna-sankhyane--
in terms of different modes; yatha-vat--as they act; srnu--hear; tani--
all of them; api--also.
TRANSLATIONIn accordance with the three modes of material nature, there are three
kinds of knowledge, action, and performers of action. Listen as Idescribe them.
PURPORTIn the Fourteenth Chapter the three divisions of the modes of material
nature were elaborately described. In that chapter it was said that themode of goodness is illuminating, the mode of passion materialistic,and the mode of ignorance conducive to laziness and indolence. All themodes of material nature are binding; they are not sources ofliberation. Even in the mode of goodness one is conditioned. In theSeventeenth Chapter, the different types of worship by different typesof men in different modes of material nature were described. In thisverse, the Lord wishes to speak about the different types of knowledge,workers, and work itself according to the three material modes.
TEXT 20
sarva-bhutesu yenaikam
bhavam avyayam iksateavibhaktam vibhaktesutaj jnanam viddhi sattvikam
SYNONYMSsarva-bhutesu--in all living entities; yena--by whom; ekam--one;
bhavam--situation; avyayam--imperishable; iksate--does see; avibhaktam--undivided; vibhaktesu--in the numberless divided; tat--that; jnanam--knowledge; viddhi--know; sattvikam--in the mode of goodness.
TRANSLATIONThat knowledge by which one undivided spiritual nature is seen in all
existences, undivided in the divided, is knowledge in the mode ofgoodness.
PURPORTA person who sees one spirit soul in every living being, whether a
demigod, human being, animal, bird, beast, aquatic or plant, possessesknowledge in the mode of goodness. In all living entities, one spiritsoul is there, although they have different bodies in terms of theirprevious work. As described in the Seventh Chapter, the manifestationof the living force in every body is due to the superior nature of theSupreme Lord. Thus to see that one superior nature, that living force,in every body is to see in the mode of goodness. That living energy isimperishable, although the bodies are perishable. The difference isperceived in terms of the body because there are many forms of materialexistence in conditional life; therefore they appear to be divided.Such impersonal knowledge finally leads to self-realization.
TEXT 21
prthaktvena tu yaj jnanam
nana-bhavan prthag-vidhanvetti sarvesu bhutesutaj jnanam viddhi rajasam
SYNONYMSprthaktvena--because of division; tu--but; yat jnanam--which knowledge;
nana-bhavan--multifarious situations; prthak-vidhan--differently;vetti--one who knows; sarvesu--in all; bhutesu--living entities; tatjnanam--that knowledge; viddhi--must be known; rajasam--in terms ofpassion.
TRANSLATIONThat knowledge by which a different type of living entity is seen to be
dwelling in different bodies is knowledge in the mode of passion.
PURPORTThe concept that the material body is the living entity and that with
the destruction of the body the consciousness is also destroyed iscalled knowledge in the mode of passion. According to that knowledge,bodies differ from one another because of the development of differenttypes of consciousness, otherwise there is no separate soul whichmanifests consciousness. The body is itself the soul, and there is noseparate soul beyond the body. According to such knowledge,consciousness is temporary. Or else there are no individual souls, butthere is an all-pervading soul, which is full of knowledge, and thisbody is a manifestation of temporary ignorance. Or beyond this bodythere is no special individual or supreme soul. All such conceptionsare considered products of the mode of passion.
TEXT 22
yat tu krtsna-vad ekasmin
karye saktam ahaitukamatattvartha-vad alpam catat tamasam udahrtam
SYNONYMSyat--that which; tu--but; krtsna-vat--all in all; ekasmin--in one;
karye--work; saktam--attached; ahaitukam--without cause; atattva-artha-vat--without reality; alpam--very meager; ca--and; tat--that; tamasam--in the mode of darkness; udahrtam--is spoken.
TRANSLATIONAnd that knowledge by which one is attached to one kind of work as the
all in all, without knowledge of the truth, and which is very meager,is said to be in the mode of darkness.
PURPORTThe "knowledge" of the common man is always in the mode of darkness or
ignorance because every living entity in conditional life is born into
the mode of ignorance. One who does not develop knowledge through the
authorities or scriptural injunctions has knowledge that is limited tothe body. He is not concerned about acting in terms of the directionsof scripture. For him God is money, and knowledge means thesatisfaction of bodily demands. Such knowledge has no connection withthe Absolute Truth. It is more or less like the knowledge of theordinary animals: the knowledge of eating, sleeping, defending andmating. Such knowledge is described here as the product of the mode ofdarkness. In other words, knowledge concerning the spirit soul beyondthis body is called knowledge in the mode of goodness, and knowledgeproducing many theories and doctrines by dint of mundane logic andmental speculation is the product of the mode of passion, and knowledgeconcerned with only keeping the body comfortable is said to be in themode of ignorance.
TEXT 23
niyatam sanga-rahitam
araga-dvesatah krtamaphala-prepsuna karmayat tat sattvikam ucyate
SYNONYMSniyatam--regulative; sanga-rahitam--without attachment; araga-dvesatah-
-without love or hatred; krtam--done; aphala-prepsuna--without fruitiveresult; karma--acts; yat--which; tat--that; sattvikam--in the mode ofgoodness; ucyate--is called.
TRANSLATIONAs for actions, that action in accordance with duty, which is performed
without attachment, without love or hate, by one who has renouncedfruitive results, is called action in the mode of goodness.
PURPORTRegulated occupational duties, as prescribed in the scriptures in terms
of the different orders and divisions of society, performed withoutattachment or proprietary rights and therefore without any love orhatred, and performed in Krsna consciousness for the satisfaction ofthe Supreme, without self-satisfaction or self-gratification, arecalled actions in the mode of goodness.
TEXT 24
yat tu kamepsuna karma
sahankarena va punahkriyate bahulayasamtad rajasam udahrtam
SYNONYMSyat--that which; tu--but; kama-ipsuna--with fruitive result; karma--
work; sa-ahankarena--with ego; va--or; punah--again; kriyate--performed; bahula-ayasam--with great labor; tat--that; rajasam--in themode of passion; udahrtam--is said to be.
TRANSLATION
But action performed with great effort by one seeking to gratify his
desires, and which is enacted from a sense of false ego, is calledaction in the mode of passion.
TEXT 25
anubandham ksayam himsam
anapeksya ca paurusammohad arabhyate karmayat tat tamasam ucyate
SYNONYMSanubandham--future bondage; ksayam--destruction; himsam--violence;
anapeksya--without consideration of consequences; ca--also; paurusam--distressing to others; mohat--by illusion; arabhyate--begun; karma--work; yat--which; tat--that; tamasam--in the mode of ignorance; ucyate--is said to be.
TRANSLATIONAnd that action performed in ignorance and delusion without
consideration of future bondage or consequences, which inflicts injuryand is impractical, is said to be action in the mode of ignorance.
PURPORTOne has to give account of one's actions to the state or to the agents
of the Supreme Lord called the Yamadutas. Irresponsible work isdestructive because it destroys the regulative principles of scripturalinjunction. It is often based on violence and is distressing to otherliving entities. Such irresponsible work is carried out in the light ofone's personal experience. This is called illusion. And all suchillusory work is a product of the mode of ignorance.
TEXT 26
mukta-sango 'naham-vadi
dhrty-utsaha-samanvitahsiddhy-asiddhyor nirvikarahkarta sattvika ucyate
SYNONYMSmukta-sangah--liberated from all material association; anaham-vadi--
without false ego; dhrti-utsaha--with great enthusiasm; samanvitah--qualified in that way; siddhi--perfection; asiddhyoh--failure;nirvikarah--without change; karta--worker; sattvikah--in the mode ofgoodness; ucyate--is said to be.
TRANSLATIONThe worker who is free from all material attachments and false ego, who
is enthusiastic and resolute and who is indifferent to success orfailure, is a worker in the mode of goodness.
PURPORT
A person in Krsna consciousness is always transcendental to the
material modes of nature. He has no expectations for the result of thework entrusted to him because he is above false ego and pride. Still,he is always enthusiastic till the completion of such work. He does notworry about the distress undertaken; he is always enthusiastic. He doesnot care for success or failure; he is equal in both distress orhappiness. Such a worker is situated in the mode of goodness.
TEXT 27
ragi karma-phala-prepsur
lubdho himsatmako 'sucihharsa-sokanvitah kartarajasah parikirtitah
SYNONYMSragi--very much attached; karma-phala--to the fruit of the work;
prepsuh--desiring; lubdhah--greedy; himsa-atmakah--and always envious;asucih--unclean; harsa-soka-anvitah--complicated, with joy and sorrow;karta--such a worker; rajasah--in the mode of passion; parikirtitah--isdeclared.
TRANSLATIONBut that worker who is attached to the fruits of his labor and who
passionately wants to enjoy them, who is greedy, envious and impure andmoved by happiness and distress, is a worker in the mode of passion.
PURPORTA person is too much attached to a certain kind of work or to the
result because he has too much attachment for materialism or hearth andhome, wife and children. Such a person has no desire for higherelevation in life. He is simply concerned with making this world asmaterially comfortable as possible. He is generally very greedy, and hethinks that anything attained by him is permanent and never to be lost.Such a person is envious of others and prepared to do anything wrongfor sense gratification. Therefore such a person is unclean, and hedoes not care whether his earning is pure or impure. He is very happyif his work is successful and very much distressed when his work is notsuccessful. Such a man is in the mode of passion.
TEXT 28
ayuktah prakrtah stabdhah
satho naiskrtiko 'lasahvisadi dirgha-sutri cakarta tamasa ucyate
SYNONYMSayuktah--without reference to scriptural injunctions; prakrtah--
materialistic; stabdhah--obstinate; sathah--deceitful; naiskrtikah--expert in insulting others; alasah--lazy; visadi--morose; dirgha-sutri-
-procrastinating; ca--also; karta--worker; tamasah--in the mode of
ignorance; ucyate--is said to be.
TRANSLATIONAnd that worker who is always engaged in work against the injunctions
of the scripture, who is materialistic, obstinate, cheating and expertin insulting others, who is lazy, always morose and procrastinating, isa worker in the mode of ignorance.
PURPORTIn the scriptural injunctions we find what sort of work should be
performed and what sort of work should not be performed. Those who donot care for those injunctions engage in work not to be done, and suchpersons are generally materialistic. They work according to the modesof nature, not according to the injunctions of the scripture. Suchworkers are not very gentle, and generally they are always cunning andexpert in insulting others. They are very lazy; even though they havesome duty, they do not do it properly, and they put it aside to be donelater on. Therefore they appear to be morose. They procrastinate;anything which can be done in an hour they drag on for years. Suchworkers are situated in the mode of ignorance.
TEXT 29
buddher bhedam dhrtes caiva
gunatas tri-vidham srnuprocyamanam asesenaprthaktvena dhananjaya
SYNONYMSbuddheh--of intelligence; bhedam--differences; dhrteh--of steadiness;
ca--also; eva--certainly; gunatah--by the modes of material nature;tri-vidham--the three kinds of; srnu--just hear; procyamanam--asdescribed by Me; asesena--in detail; prthaktvena--differently;dhananjaya--O winner of wealth.
TRANSLATIONNow, O winner of wealth, please listen as I tell you in detail of the
three kinds of understanding and determination according to the threemodes of nature.
PURPORTNow after explaining knowledge, the object of knowledge and the knower,
in three different divisions according to the modes of material nature,the Lord is explaining the intelligence and determination of the workerin the same way.
TEXT 30
pravrttim ca nivrttim ca
karyakarye bhayabhayebandham moksam ca ya vettibuddhih sa partha sattviki
SYNONYMS
pravrttim--deserving; ca--also; nivrttim--not deserving; ca--and;
karya--work; akarye--reaction; bhaya--fearful; abhaye--fearlessness;bandham--obligation; moksam ca--and liberation; ya--that which; vetti--knows; buddhih--understanding; sa--that; partha--O son of Prtha;sattviki--in the mode of goodness.
TRANSLATIONO son of Prtha, that understanding by which one knows what ought to be
done and what ought not to be done, what is to be feared and what isnot to be feared, what is binding and what is liberating, thatunderstanding is established in the mode of goodness.
PURPORTActions which are performed in terms of the directions of the
scriptures are called pravrtti, or actions that deserve to beperformed, and actions which are not so directed are not to beperformed. One who does not know the scriptural directions becomesentangled in the actions and reactions of work. Understanding whichdiscriminates by intelligence is situated in the mode of goodness.
TEXT 31
yaya dharmam adharmam ca
karyam cakaryam eva caayathavat prajanatibuddhih sa partha rajasi
SYNONYMSyaya--by which; dharmam--principles of religion; adharmam--and
irreligion; ca--and; karyam--work; ca--also; akaryam--what ought not tobe done; eva--certainly; ca--also; ayatha-vat--not perfectly;prajanati--knows; buddhih--intelligence; sa--that; partha--O son ofPrtha; rajasi--in the mode of passion.
TRANSLATIONAnd that understanding which cannot distinguish between the religious
way of life and the irreligious, between action that should be done andaction that should not be done, that imperfect understanding, O son ofPrtha, is in the mode of passion.
PURPORTIntelligence in the mode of passion is always working perversely. It
accepts religions which are not actually religions and rejects actualreligion. All views and activities are misguided. Men of passionateintelligence understand a great soul to be a common man and accept acommon man as a great soul. They think truth to be untruth and acceptuntruth as truth. In all activities they simply take the wrong path;therefore their intelligence is in the mode of passion.
TEXT 32
adharmam dharmam iti ya
manyate tamasavrtasarvarthan viparitams cabuddhih sa partha tamasi
SYNONYMSadharmam--irreligion; dharmam--religion; iti--thus; ya--which; manyate-
-thinks; tamasa--by illusion; avrta--covered; sarva-arthan--all things;viparitan--the wrong direction; ca--also; buddhih--intelligence; sa--that; partha--O son of Prtha; tamasi--the mode of ignorance.
TRANSLATIONThat understanding which considers irreligion to be religion and
religion to be irreligion, under the spell of illusion and darkness,and strives always in the wrong direction, O Partha, is in the mode ofignorance.
PURPORTIntelligence in the mode of ignorance is always working the opposite of
the way it should. It accepts religions which are not actuallyreligions and rejects actual religion. Men in ignorance understand agreat soul to be a common man and accept a common man as a great soul.They think truth to be untruth and accept untruth as truth. In allactivities they simply take the wrong path; therefore theirintelligence is in the mode of ignorance.
TEXT 33
dhrtya yaya dharayate
manah-pranendriya-kriyahyogenavyabhicarinyadhrtih sa partha sattviki
SYNONYMSdhrtya--determination; yaya--by which; dharayate--is sustained; manah--
mind; prana--life; indriya--senses; kriyah--activities; yogena--by yogapractice; avyabhicarinya--without any break; dhrtih--suchdetermination; sa--that; partha--O son of Prtha; sattviki--in the modeof goodness.
TRANSLATIONO son of Prtha, that determination which is unbreakable, which is
sustained with steadfastness by yoga practice, and thus controls themind, life, and the acts of the senses, is in the mode of goodness.
PURPORTYoga is a means to understand the Supreme Soul. One who is steadily
fixed in the Supreme Soul with determination, concentrating one's mind,life and sensual activities on the Supreme, engages in Krsnaconsciousness. That sort of determination is in the mode of goodness.The word avyabhicarinya is very significant, for it refers to persons
who are engaged in Krsna consciousness and are never deviated by any
other activity.
TEXT 34
yaya tu dharma-kamarthan
dhrtya dharayate 'rjunaprasangena phalakanksidhrtih sa partha rajasi
SYNONYMSyaya--by which; tu--but; dharma-kama-arthan--for religiosity and
economic development; dhrtya--by determination; dharayate--in suchterms; arjuna--O Arjuna; prasangena--for that; phala-akanksi--desiringfruitive results; dhrtih--determination; sa--that; partha--O son ofPrtha; rajasi--in the mode of passion.
TRANSLATIONAnd that determination by which one holds fast to fruitive results in
religion, economic development and sense gratification is of the natureof passion, O Arjuna.
PURPORTAny person who is always desirous of fruitive results in religious or
economic activities, whose only desire is sense gratification, andwhose mind, life and senses are thus engaged, is in the mode ofpassion.
TEXT 35
yaya svapnam bhayam sokam
visadam madam eva cana vimuncati durmedhadhrtih sa partha tamasi
SYNONYMSyaya--by which; svapnam--dream; bhayam--fearfulness; sokam--
lamentation; visadam--moroseness; madam--illusion; eva--certainly; ca--also; na--never; vimuncati--is liberated; durmedha--unintelligent;dhrtih--determination; sa--that; partha--O son of Prtha; tamasi--in themode of ignorance.
TRANSLATIONAnd that determination which cannot go beyond dreaming, fearfulness,
lamentation, moroseness and, illusion--such unintelligent determinationis in the mode of darkness.
PURPORTIt should not be concluded that a person in the mode of goodness does
not dream. Here dream means too much sleep. Dreaming is always present;either in the mode of goodness, passion or ignorance, dreaming is anatural occurrence. But those who cannot avoid oversleeping, who cannot
avoid the pride of enjoying material objects and who are always
dreaming of lording it over the material world, whose life, mind andsenses are thus engaged, are considered to be in the mode of ignorance.
TEXT 36
sukham tv idanim tri-vidham
srnu me bharatarsabhaabhyasad ramate yatraduhkhantam ca nigacchati
yat tad agre visam iva
pariname 'mrtopamamtat sukham sattvikam proktamatma-buddhi-prasada-jam
SYNONYMSsukham--happiness; tu--but; idanim--now; tri-vidham--three kinds; srnu-
-hear; me--from Me; bharata-rsabha--O best amongst the Bharatas;abhyasat--by practice; ramate--enjoyer; yatra--where; duhkha--distress;antam--end; ca--also; nigacchati--gains. yat--that which; tat--that;agre--in the beginning; visam iva--like poison; pariname--at the end;amrta--nectar; upamam--compared to; tat--that; sukham--happiness;sattvikam--in the mode of goodness; proktam--is said; atma--self;buddhi--intelligence; prasada-jam--satisfactory.
TRANSLATIONO best of the Bharatas, now please hear from Me about the three kinds
of happiness which the conditioned soul enjoys, and by which hesometimes comes to the end of all distress. That which in the beginningmay be just like poison but at the end is just like nectar and whichawakens one to self-realization is said to be happiness in the mode ofgoodness.
PURPORTA conditioned soul tries to enjoy material happiness again and again.
Thus he chews the chewed, but, sometimes, in the course of suchenjoyment, he becomes relieved from material entanglement byassociation with a great soul. In other words, a conditioned soul isalways engaged in some type of sense gratification, but when heunderstands by good association that it is only a repetition of thesame thing, and he is awakened to his real Krsna consciousness, he issometimes relieved from such repetitive so-called happiness.In the pursuit of self-realization, one has to follow many rules andregulations to control the mind and the senses and to concentrate themind on the self. All these procedures are very difficult, bitter likepoison, but if one is successful in following the regulations and comesto the transcendental position, he begins to drink real nectar, and heenjoys life.
TEXT 38
visayendriya-samyogad
yat tad agre 'mrtopamampariname visam iva
tat sukham rajasam smrtam
SYNONYMSvisaya--objects of the senses; indriya--senses; samyogat--combination;
yat--which; tat--that; agre--in the beginning; amrta-upamam--just likenectar; pariname--at the end; visam iva--like poison; tat--that;sukham--happiness; rajasam--in the mode of passion; smrtam--isconsidered.
TRANSLATIONThat happiness which is derived from contact of the senses with their
objects and which appears like nectar at first but poison at the end issaid to be of the nature of passion.
PURPORTA young man and a young woman meet, and the senses drive the young man
to see her, to touch her and to have sexual intercourse. In thebeginning this may be very pleasing to the senses, but at the end, orafter some time, it becomes just like poison. They are separated orthere is divorce, there is lamentation, there is sorrow, etc. Suchhappiness is always in the mode of passion. Happiness derived from acombination of the senses and the sense objects is always a cause ofdistress and should be avoided by all means.
TEXT 39
yad agre canubandhe ca
sukham mohanam atmanahnidralasya-pramadotthamtat tamasam udahrtam
SYNONYMSyat--that which; agre--in the beginning; ca--also; anubandhe--by
binding; ca--also; sukham--happiness; mohanam--illusion; atmanah--ofthe self; nidra--sleeping; alasya--laziness; pramada--illusion; uttham--produced of; tat--that; tamasam--in the mode of ignorance; udahrtam--is said to be.
TRANSLATIONAnd that happiness which is blind to self-realization, which is
delusion from beginning to end and which arises from sleep, lazinessand illusion is said to be of the nature of ignorance.
PURPORTOne who takes pleasure in laziness and in sleep is certainly in the
mode of darkness, and one who has no idea how to act and how not to actis also in the mode of ignorance. For the person in the mode ofignorance, everything is illusion. There is no happiness either in thebeginning or the end. For the person in the mode of passion there mightbe some kind of ephemeral happiness in the beginning and at the enddistress, but for the person in the mode of ignorance there is onlydistress both in the beginning and at the end.
TEXT 40
na tad asti prthivyam va
divi devesu va punahsattvam prakrti-jair muktamyad ebhih syat tribhir gunaih
SYNONYMSna--not; tat--that; asti--there is; prthivyam--within the universe; va-
-or; divi--in the higher planetary system; devesu--amongst thedemigods; va--or; punah--again; sattvam--existence; prakrti-jaih--underthe influence of material nature; muktam--liberated; yat--that; ebhih--by this; syat--so becomes; tribhih--by three; gunaih--modes of materialnature.
TRANSLATIONThere is no being existing, either here or among the demigods in the
higher planetary systems, which is freed from the three modes ofmaterial nature.
PURPORTThe Lord here summarizes the total influence of the three modes of
material nature all over the universe.
TEXT 41
brahmana-ksatriya-visam
sudranam ca parantapakarmani pravibhaktanisvabhava-prabhavair gunaih
SYNONYMSbrahmana--the brahmanas; ksatriya--the ksatriyas; visam--the vaisyas;
sudranam--the sudras; ca--and; parantapa--O subduer of the enemies;karmani--activities; pravibhaktani--are divided; svabhava--own nature;prabhavaih--born of; gunaih--by the modes of material nature.
TRANSLATIONBrahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas and sudras are distinguished by their
qualities of work, O chastiser of the enemy, in accordance with themodes of nature.
TEXT 42
samo damas tapah saucam
ksantir arjavam eva cajnanam vijnanam astikyambrahma-karma svabhava-jam
SYNONYMS
samah--peacefulness; damah--self-control; tapah--austerity; saucam--
purity; ksantih--tolerance; arjavam--honesty; eva--certainly; ca--and;jnanam--knowledge; vijnanam--wisdom; astikyam--religiousness; brahma--of a brahmana; karma--duty; svabhava-jam--born of his own nature.
TRANSLATIONPeacefulness, self-control, austerity, purity, tolerance, honesty,
knowledge, wisdom and religiousness--these are the qualities by whichthe brahmanas work.
TEXT 43
sauryam tejo dhrtir daksyam
yuddhe capy apalayanamdanam isvara-bhavas caksatram karma svabhava-jam
SYNONYMSsauryam--heroism; tejah--power; dhrtih--determination; daksyam--
resourcefulness; yuddhe--in battle; ca--and; api--also; apalayanam--notfleeing; danam--generosity; isvara--leadership; bhavah--nature; ca--and; ksatram--ksatriya; karma--duty; svabhava-jam--born of his ownnature.
TRANSLATIONHeroism, power, determination, resourcefulness, courage in battle,
generosity, and leadership are the qualities of work for the ksatriyas.
TEXT 44
krsi-go-raksya-vanijyam
vaisya-karma svabhava-jamparicaryatmakam karmasudrasyapi svabhava-jam
SYNONYMSkrsi--plowing; go--cows; raksya--protection; vanijyam--trade; vaisya--
vaisya; karma--duty; svabhava-jam--born of his own nature; paricarya--service; atmakam--nature; karma--duty; sudrasya--of the sudra; api--also; svabhava-jam--born of his own nature.
TRANSLATIONFarming, cow protection and business are the qualities of work for the
vaisyas, and for the sudras there is labor and service to others.
TEXT 45
sve sve karmany abhiratah
samsiddhim labhate narahsva-karma-niratah siddhimyatha vindati tac chrnu
SYNONYMS
sve--own; sve--own; karmani--in work; abhiratah--following; samsiddhim-
-perfection; labhate--achieves; narah--a man; sva-karma--by his ownduty; niratah--engaged; siddhim--perfection; yatha--as; vindati--attains; tat--that; srnu--listen.
TRANSLATIONBy following his qualities of work, every man can become perfect. Now
please hear from Me how this can be done.
TEXT 46
yatah pravrttir bhutanam
yena sarvam idam tatamsva-karmana tam abhyarcyasiddhim vindati manavah
SYNONYMSyatah--from whom; pravrttih--the emanation; bhutanam--of all living
entities; yena--by whom; sarvam--all; idam--this; tatam--is pervaded;sva-karmana--in his own duties; tam--Him; abhyarcya--by worshiping;siddhim--perfection; vindati--achieves; manavah--a man.
TRANSLATIONBy worship of the Lord, who is the source of all beings and who is all-
pervading, man can, in the performance of his own duty, attainperfection.
PURPORTAs stated in the Fifteenth Chapter, all living beings are fragmental
parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord. As such the Supreme Lord is thebeginning of all living entities. This is confirmed in the Vedanta-sutra--janmady asya yatah. The Supreme Lord is therefore the beginningof life of every living entity. And the Supreme Lord, by His twoenergies, His external energy and internal energy, is all-pervading.Therefore one should worship the Supreme Lord with His energies.Generally the Vaisnava devotees worship the Supreme Lord with Hisinternal energy. His external energy is a perverted reflection of theinternal energy. The external energy is a background, but the SupremeLord by the expansion of His plenary portion as Paramatma is situatedeverywhere. He is the Supersoul of all demigods, all human beings, allanimals, everywhere. One should therefore know that as part and parcelof the Supreme Lord it is his duty to render service unto the Supreme.Everyone should be engaged in devotional service to the Lord in fullKrsna consciousness. That is recommended in this verse.Everyone should think that he is engaged in a particular type ofoccupation by Hrsikesa, the master of the senses. And, by the result ofthe work in which one is engaged, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,Sri Krsna, should be worshiped. If one thinks always in this way, infull Krsna consciousness, then, by the grace of the Lord, he becomesfully aware of everything. That is the perfection of life. The Lordsays in Bhagavad-gita (12.7), tesam aham samuddharta. The Supreme LordHimself takes charge of delivering such a devotee. That is the highest
perfection of life. In whatever occupation one may be engaged, if he
serves the Supreme Lord, he will achieve the highest perfection.
TEXT 47
sreyan sva-dharmo vigunah
para-dharmat sv-anusthitatsvabhava-niyatam karmakurvan napnoti kilbisam
SYNONYMSsreyan--better; sva-dharmah--one's own occupation; vigunah--imperfectly
performed; para-dharmat--another's occupation; su-anusthitat--perfectlydone; svabhava-niyatam--prescribed duties according to one's nature;karma--work; kurvan--performing; na--never; apnoti--achieve; kilbisam--sinful reactions.
TRANSLATIONIt is better to engage in one's own occupation, even though one may
perform it imperfectly, than to accept another's occupation and performit perfectly. Prescribed duties according to one's nature, are neveraffected by sinful reactions.
PURPORTOne's occupational duty is prescribed in Bhagavad-gita. As already
discussed in previous verses, the duties of a brahmana, ksatriya,vaisya and sudra are prescribed according to the particular modes ofnature. One should not imitate another's duty. A man who is by natureattracted to the kind of work done by sudras should not artificiallyclaim himself to be a brahmana, although he may have been born into abrahmana family. In this way one should work according to his ownnature; no work is abominable, if performed in the service of theSupreme Lord. The occupational duty of a brahmana is certainly in themode of goodness, but if a person is not by nature in the mode ofgoodness, he should not imitate the occupational duty of a brahmana.For a ksatriya, or administrator, there are so many abominable things;a ksatriya has to be violent to kill his enemies, and sometimes aksatriya has to tell lies for the sake of diplomacy. Such violence andduplicity accompany political affairs, but a ksatriya is not supposedto give up his occupational duty and try to perform the duties of abrahmana.One should act to satisfy the Supreme Lord. For example, Arjuna was aksatriya. He was hesitating to fight the other party. But if suchfighting is performed for the sake of Krsna, the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, there need be no fear of degradation. In the business fieldalso, sometimes a merchant has to tell so many lies to make a profit.If he does not do so, there can be no profit. Sometimes a merchantsays, "Oh, my dear customer, for you I am making no profit," but oneshould know that without profit the merchant cannot exist. Therefore itshould be taken as a simple lie if a merchant says that he is notmaking a profit. But the merchant should not think that because he isengaged in an occupation in which the telling of lies is compulsory, heshould give up his profession and pursue the profession of a brahmana.That is not recommended. Whether one is a ksatriya, a vaisya, or asudra doesn't matter, if he serves, by his work, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Even brahmanas, who perform different types of
sacrifice, sometimes must kill animals because sometimes animals aresacrificed in such ceremonies. Similarly, if a ksatriya engaged in hisown occupation kills an enemy, there is no sin incurred. In the ThirdChapter these matters have been clearly and elaborately explained;every man should work for the purpose of Yajna, or for Visnu, theSupreme Personality of Godhead. Anything done for personal sensegratification is a cause of bondage. The conclusion is that everyoneshould be engaged according to the particular mode of nature he hasacquired, and he should decide to work only to serve the supreme causeof the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 48
saha-jam karma kaunteya
sa-dosam api na tyajetsarvarambha hi dosenadhumenagnir ivavrtah
SYNONYMSsaha-jam--born simultaneously; karma--work; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
sa-dosam--with fault; api--although; na--never; tyajet--to be given up;sarva-arambhah--any venture; hi--certainly; dosena--with fault;dhumena--with smoke; agnih--fire; iva--as; avrtah--covered.
TRANSLATIONEvery endeavor is covered by some sort of fault, just as fire is
covered by smoke. Therefore one should not give up the work which isborn of his nature, O son of Kunti, even if such work is full of fault.
PURPORTIn conditioned life, all work is contaminated by the material modes of
nature. Even if one is a brahmana, he has to perform sacrifices inwhich animal killing is necessary. Similarly, a ksatriya, however pioushe may be, has to fight enemies. He cannot avoid it. Similarly, amerchant, however pious he may be, must sometimes hide his profit tostay in business, or he may sometimes have to do business on the blackmarket. These things are necessary; one cannot avoid them. Similarly,even though a man is a sudra serving a bad master, he has to carry outthe order of the master, even though it should not be done. Despitethese flaws, one should continue to carry out his prescribed duties,for they are born out of his own nature.A very nice example is given herein. Although fire is pure, still thereis smoke. Yet smoke does not make the fire impure. Even though there issmoke in the fire, fire is still considered to be the purest of allelements. If one prefers to give up the work of a ksatriya and take upthe occupation of a brahmana, he is not assured that in the occupationof a brahmana there are no unpleasant duties. One may then concludethat in the material world no one can be completely free from thecontamination of material nature. This example of fire and smoke isvery appropriate in this connection. When in wintertime one takes astone from the fire, sometimes smoke disturbs the eyes and other partsof the body, but still one must make use of the fire despite disturbingconditions. Similarly, one should not give up his natural occupationbecause there are some disturbing elements. Rather, one should be
determined to serve the Supreme Lord by his occupational duty in Krsna
consciousness. That is the perfectional point. When a particular typeof occupation is performed for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord,all the defects in that particular occupation are purified. When theresults of work are purified, when connected with devotional service,one becomes perfect in seeing the self within, and that is self-realization.
TEXT 49
asakta-buddhih sarvatra
jitatma vigata-sprhahnaiskarmya-siddhim paramamsannyasenadhigacchati
SYNONYMSasakta-buddhih--unattached intelligence; sarvatra--everywhere; jita-
atma--control of the mind; vigata-sprhah--without material desires;naiskarmya-siddhim--perfection of non-reaction; paramam--supreme;sannyasena--by the renounced order of life; adhigacchati--attains.
TRANSLATIONOne can obtain the results of renunciation simply by self-control and
by becoming unattached to material things and disregarding materialenjoyments. That is the highest perfetional stage of renunciation.
PURPORTReal renunciation means that one should always think himself part and
parcel of the Supreme Lord. Therefore he has no right to enjoy theresults of his work. Since he is part and parcel of the Supreme Lord,the results of his work must be enjoyed by the Supreme Lord. This isactually Krsna consciousness. The person acting in Krsna consciousnessis really a sannyasi, one in the renounced order of life. By such amentality, one is satisfied because he is actually acting for theSupreme. Thus he is not attached to anything material; he becomesaccustomed to not taking pleasure in anything beyond the transcendentalhappiness derived from the service of the Lord. A sannyasi is supposedto be free from the reactions of his past activities, but a person whois in Krsna consciousness automatically attains this perfection withouteven accepting the so-called order of renunciation. This state of mindis called yogarudha, or the perfectional stage of yoga, as confirmed inthe Third Chapter, yas tv atma-ratir eva syat: one who is satisfied inhimself has no fear of any kind of reaction from his activity.
TEXT 50
siddhim prapto yatha brahma
tathapnoti nibodha mesamasenaiva kaunteyanistha jnanasya ya para
SYNONYMSsiddhim--perfection; praptah--achieving; yatha--as; brahma--the
Supreme; tatha--so; apnoti--achieves; nibodha--try to understand; me--
from Me; samasena--summarily; eva--certainly; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
nistha--stage; jnanasya--of knowledge; ya--which; para--transcendental.
TRANSLATIONO son of Kunti, learn from Me in brief how one can attain to the
supreme perfectional stage, Brahman, by acting in the way I shall nowsummarize.
PURPORTThe Lord describes for Arjuna how one can achieve the highest
perfectional stage simply by being engaged in his occupational duty,performing that duty for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Oneattains the supreme stage of Brahman simply by renouncing the result ofhis work for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord. That is the processof self-realization. Actual perfection of knowledge is in attainingpure Krsna consciousness; that is described in the following verses.
TEXTS 51-53
buddhya visuddhaya yukto
dhrtyatmanam niyamya casabdadin visayams tyaktvaraga-dvesau vyudasya ca
vivikta-sevi laghv-asi
yata-vak-kaya-manasahdhyana-yoga-paro nityamvairagyam samupasritah
ahankaram balam darpam
kamam krodham parigrahamvimucya nirmamah santobrahma-bhuyaya kalpate
SYNONYMSbuddhya--by the intelligence; visuddhaya--fully purified; yuktah--such
engagement; dhrtya--determination; atmanam--self; niyamya--regulated;ca--also; sabda-adin--the sense objects, such as sound, etc.; visayan--sense objects; tyaktva--giving up; raga--attachment; dvesau--hatred;vyudasya--having laid aside; ca--also; vivikta-sevi--living in asecluded place; laghu-asi--eating a small quantity; yata-vak--controlof speech; kaya--body; manasah--control of the mind; dhyana-yoga-parah--always absorbed in trance; nityam--twenty-four hours a day; vairagyam--detachment; samupasritah--taken shelter of; ahankaram--false ego;balam--false strength; darpam--false pride; kamam--lust; krodham--anger; parigraham--acceptance of material things; vimucya--beingdelivered; nirmamah--without proprietorship; santah--peaceful; brahma-bhuyaya--to become self-realized; kalpate--is understood.
TRANSLATIONBeing purified by his intelligence and controlling the mind with
determination, giving up the objects of sense gratification, beingfreed from attachment and hatred, one who lives in a secluded place,who eats little and who controls the body and the tongue, and is always
in trance and is detached, who is without false ego, false strength,
false pride, lust, anger, and who does not accept material things, sucha person is certainly elevated to the position of self-realization.
PURPORTWhen one is purified by knowledge, he keeps himself in the mode of
goodness. Thus one becomes the controller of the mind and is always intrance. Because he is not attached to the objects of sensegratification, he does not eat more than what he requires, and hecontrols the activities of his body and mind. He has no false egobecause he does not accept the body as himself. Nor has he a desire tomake the body fat and strong by accepting so many material things.Because he has no bodily concept of life, he is not falsely proud. Heis satisfied with everything that is offered to him by the grace of theLord, and he is never angry in the absence of sense gratification. Nordoes he endeavor to acquire sense objects. Thus when he is completelyfree from false ego, he becomes nonattached to all material things, andthat is the stage of self-realization of Brahman. That stage is calledthe brahma-bhuta stage. When one is free from the material conceptionof life, he becomes peaceful and cannot be agitated. This is describedin Bhagavad-gita (2.70):
apuryamanam acala-pratistham
samudram apah pravisanti yadvattadvat kama yam pravisanti sarvesa santim apnoti na kama-kami
"A person who is not disturbed by the incessant flow of desires--that
enter like rivers into the ocean, which is ever being filled but isalways still--can alone achieve peace, and not the man who strives tosatisfy such desires."
TEXT 54
brahma-bhutah prasannatma
na socati na kanksatisamah sarvesu bhutesumad-bhaktim labhate param
SYNONYMSbrahma-bhutah--being one with the Absolute; prasanna-atma--fully
joyful; na--never; socati--laments; na--never; kanksati--desires;samah--equally disposed; sarvesu--all; bhutesu--living entities; mat-bhaktim--My devotional service; labhate--gains; param--transcendental.
TRANSLATIONOne who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme
Brahman and becomes fully joyful. He never laments or desires to haveanything. He is equally disposed to every living entity. In that statehe attains pure devotional service unto Me.
PURPORTTo the impersonalist, achieving the brahma-bhuta stage, becoming one
with the Absolute, is the last word. But for the personalist, or pure
devotee, one has to go still further to become engaged in pure
devotional service. This means that one who is engaged in puredevotional service to the Supreme Lord is already in a state ofliberation, called brahma-bhuta, oneness with the Absolute. Withoutbeing one with the Supreme, the Absolute, one cannot render serviceunto Him. In the absolute conception, there is no difference betweenthe served and the servitor; yet the distinction is there, in a higherspiritual sense.In the material concept of life, when one works for sensegratification, there is misery, but in the absolute world, when one isengaged in pure devotional service, there is no misery. The devotee inKrsna consciousness has nothing to lament or desire. Since God is full,a living entity who is engaged in God's service, in Krsnaconsciousness, becomes also full in himself. He is just like a rivercleansed of all dirty water. Because a pure devotee has no thoughtother than Krsna, he is naturally always joyful. He does not lament forany material loss or gain, because he is full in the service of theLord. He has no desire for material enjoyment because he knows thatevery living entity is a fragmental part and parcel of the Supreme Lordand therefore eternally a servant. He does not see, in the materialworld, someone as higher and someone as lower; higher and lowerpositions are ephemeral, and a devotee has nothing to do with ephemeralappearances or disappearances. For him stone and gold are of equalvalue. This is the brahma-bhuta stage, and this stage is attained veryeasily by the pure devotee. In that stage of existence, the idea ofbecoming one with the Supreme Brahman and annihilating one'sindividuality becomes hellish, and the idea of attaining the heavenlykingdom becomes phantasmagoria, and the senses are like brokenserpents' teeth. As there is no fear of a serpent with broken teeth, sothere is no fear from the senses when they are automaticallycontrolled. The world is miserable for the materially infected person,but for a devotee the entire world is as good as Vaikuntha, or thespiritual sky. The highest personality in this material universe is nomore significant than an ant for a devotee. Such a stage can beachieved by the mercy of Lord Caitanya, who preached pure devotionalservice in this age.
TEXT 55
bhaktya mam abhijanati
yavan yas casmi tattvatahtato mam tattvato jnatvavisate tad-anantaram
SYNONYMSbhaktya--by pure devotional service; mam--Me; abhijanati--one can know;
yavan--as much as; yah ca asmi--as I am; tattvatah--in truth; tatah--thereafter; mam--Me; tattvatah--by truth; jnatva--knowing; visate--enters; tat-anantaram--thereafter.
TRANSLATIONOne can understand the Supreme Personality as He is only by devotional
service. And when one is in full consciousness of the Supreme Lord bysuch devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, and His plenary portions
cannot be understood by mental speculation nor by the nondevotees. Ifanyone wants to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he hasto take to pure devotional service under the guidance of a puredevotee. Otherwise, the truth of the Supreme Personality of Godheadwill always be hidden. It is already stated in Bhagavad-gita (7.25),naham prakasah sarvasya: He is not revealed to everyone. No one canunderstand God simply by erudite scholarship or mental speculation.Only one who is actually engaged in Krsna consciousness and devotionalservice can understand what Krsna is. University degrees are nothelpful.One who is fully conversant with the Krsna science becomes eligible toenter into the spiritual kingdom, the abode of Krsna. Becoming Brahmandoes not mean that one loses his identity. Devotional service is there,and as long as devotional service exists, there must be God, thedevotee, and the process of devotional service. Such knowledge is nevervanquished, even after liberation. Liberation involves getting freefrom the concept of material life; in spiritual life the samedistinction is there, the same individuality is there, but in pureKrsna consciousness. One should not misunderstand that the word visate,"enters into Me," supports the monist theory that one becomeshomogeneous with the impersonal Brahman. No. Visate means that one canenter into the abode of the Supreme Lord in his's individuality toengage in His association and render service unto Him. For instance, agreen bird enters a green tree not to become one with the tree but toenjoy the fruits of the tree. impersonalists generally give the exampleof a river flowing into the ocean and merging. This may be a source ofhappiness for the impersonalist, but the personalist keeps his personalindividuality like an aquatic in the ocean. We find so many livingentities within the ocean, if we go deep. Surface acquaintance with theocean is not sufficient; one must have complete knowledge of theaquatics living in the ocean depths.Because of his pure devotional service, a devotee can understand thetranscendental qualities and the opulences of the Supreme Lord intruth. As it is stated in the Eleventh Chapter, only by devotionalservice can one understand. The same is confirmed here; one canunderstand the Supreme Personality of Godhead by devotional service andenter into His kingdom.After attainment of the brahma-bhuta stage of freedom from materialconceptions, devotional service begins by one's hearing about the Lord.When one hears about the Supreme Lord, automatically the brahma-bhutastage develops, and material contamination--greediness and lust forsense enjoyment--disappears. As lust and desires disappear from theheart of a devotee, he becomes more attached to the service of theLord, and by such attachment he becomes free from materialcontamination. In that state of life he can understand the SupremeLord. This is the statement of Srimad-Bhagavatam also. After liberationthe process of bhakti, or transcendental service, continues. TheVedanta-sutra (4.1.12) confirms this: a-prayanat tatrapi hi drstam.This means that after liberation the process of devotional servicecontinues. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam, real devotional liberation isdefined as the reinstatement of the living entity in his own identity,his own constitutional position. The constitutional position is alreadyexplained: every living entity is the part-and-parcel fragmentalportion of the Supreme Lord. Therefore his constitutional position isto serve. After liberation, this service is never stopped. Actualliberation is getting free from misconceptions of life.
TEXT 56
sarva-karmany api sada
kurvano mad-vyapasrayahmat-prasadad avapnotisasvatam padam avyayam
SYNONYMSsarva--all; karmani--activities; api--although; sada--always; kurvanah-
-performing; mat--under My; vyapasrayah--protection; mat--My; prasadat--mercy; avapnoti--achieves; sasvatam--eternal; padam--abode; avyayam--imperishable.
TRANSLATIONThough engaged in all kinds of activities, My devotee, under My
protection, reaches the eternal and imperishable abode by My grace.
PURPORTThe word mad-vyapasrayah means under the protection of the Supreme
Lord. To be free from material contamination, a pure devotee acts underthe direction of the Supreme Lord or His representative, the spiritualmaster. There is no time limitation for a pure devotee. He is always,twenty-four hours, one hundred percent engaged in activities under thedirection of the Supreme Lord. To a devotee who is thus engaged inKrsna consciousness the Lord is very, very kind. In spite of alldifficulties, he is eventually placed in the transcendental abode, orKrsnaloka. He is guaranteed entrance there; there is no doubt about it.In that supreme abode, there is no change; everything is eternal,imperishable and full of knowledge.
TEXT 57
cetasa sarva-karmani
mayi sannyasya mat-parahbuddhi-yogam upasrityamac-cittah satatam bhava
SYNONYMScetasa--by intelligence; sarva-karmani--all kinds of activities; mayi--
unto Me; sannyasya--giving up; mat-parah--My protection; buddhi-yogam--devotional activities; upasritya--taking shelter of; mat-cittah--consciousness; satatam--twenty-four hours a day; bhava--just become.
TRANSLATIONIn all activities just depend upon Me and work always under My
protection. In such devotional service, be fully conscious of Me.
PURPORTWhen one acts in Krsna consciousness, he does not act as the master of
the world. Just like a servant, one should act fully under thedirection of the Supreme Lord. A servant has no individual
independence. He acts only on the order of the master. A servant acting
on behalf of the supreme master has no affection for profit and loss.He simply discharges his duty faithfully in terms of the order of theLord. Now, one may argue that Arjuna was acting under the personaldirection of Krsna, but, when Krsna is not present, how should one act?If one acts according to the direction of Krsna in this book, as wellas under the guidance of the representative of Krsna, then the resultwill be the same. The Sanskrit word mat-parah is very important in thisverse. It indicates that one has no goal in life save and except actingin Krsna consciousness just to satisfy Krsna. And, while working inthat way, one should think of Krsna only: "I have been appointed todischarge this particular duty by Krsna." While acting in such a way,one naturally has to think of Krsna. This is perfect Krsnaconsciousness. One should, however, note that after doing somethingwhimsically he should not offer the result to the Supreme Lord. Thatsort of duty is not in the devotional service of Krsna consciousness.One should act according to the order of Krsna. This is a veryimportant point. That order of Krsna comes through disciplic successionfrom the bona fide spiritual master. Therefore the spiritual master'sorder should be taken as the prime duty of life. If one gets a bonafide spiritual master and acts according to his direction, then his'sperfection of life in Krsna consciousness is guaranteed.
TEXT 58
mac-cittah sarva-durgani
mat-prasadat tarisyasiatha cet tvam ahankaranna srosyasi vinanksyasi
SYNONYMSmat--My; cittah--consciousness; sarva--all; durgani--impediments; mat--
My; prasadat--My mercy; tarisyasi--you will overcome; atha--therefore;cet--if; tvam--you; ahankarat--by false ego; na--not; srosyasi--do nothear; vinanksyasi--then lose yourself.
TRANSLATIONIf you become conscious of Me, you will pass over all the obstacles of
conditional life by My grace. If, however, you do not work in suchconsciousness but act through false ego, not hearing Me, you will belost.
PURPORTA person in full Krsna consciousness is not unduly anxious to execute
the duties of his existence. The foolish cannot understand this greatfreedom from all anxiety. For one who acts in Krsna consciousness, LordKrsna becomes the most intimate friend. He always looks after Hisfriend's comfort, and He gives Himself to His friend, who is sodevotedly engaged working twenty-four hours a day to please the Lord.Therefore, no one should be carried away by the false ego of the bodilyconcept of life. One should not falsely think himself independent ofthe laws of material nature or free to act. He is already under strictmaterial laws. But, as soon as he acts in Krsna consciousness, he isliberated, free from the material perplexities. One should note verycarefully that one who is not active in Krsna consciousness is losing
himself in the material whirlpool, in the ocean of birth and death. No
conditioned soul actually knows what is to be done and what is not tobe done, but a person who acts in Krsna consciousness is free to actbecause everything is prompted by Krsna from within and confirmed bythe spiritual master.
TEXT 59
yad ahankaram asritya
na yotsya iti manyasemithyaisa vyavasayas teprakrtis tvam niyoksyati
SYNONYMSyat--therefore; ahankaram--false ego; asritya--taking shelter; na--not;
yotsye--shall fight; iti--thus; manyase--think; mithya esah--this isall false; vyavasayah te--your determination; prakrtih--materialnature; tvam--you; niyoksyati--will engage you.
TRANSLATIONIf you do not act according to My direction and do not fight, then you
will be falsely directed. By your nature, you will have to be engagedin warfare.
PURPORTArjuna was a military man, and born of the nature of the ksatriya.
Therefore his natural duty was to fight. But, due to false ego, he wasfearing that by killing his teacher, grandfather and friends, therewould be sinful reactions. Actually he was considering himself masterof his actions, as if he were directing the good and bad results ofsuch work. He forgot that the Supreme Personality of Godhead waspresent there, instructing him to fight. That is the forgetfulness ofthe conditioned soul. The Supreme Personality gives directions as towhat is good and what is bad, and one simply has to act in Krsnaconsciousness to attain the perfection of life. No one can ascertainhis destiny as the Supreme Lord can; therefore the best course is totake direction from the Supreme Lord and act. No one should neglect theorder of the Supreme Personality of Godhead or the order of thespiritual master who is the representative of God. One should actunhesitatingly to execute the order of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead--that will keep him safe under all circumstances.
TEXT 60
svabhava-jena kaunteya
nibaddhah svena karmanakartum necchasi yan mohatkarisyasy avaso 'pi tat
SYNONYMSsvabhava-jena--by one's own nature; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
nibaddhah--conditioned; svena--by one's own; karmana--activities;kartum--to do; na--not; icchasi--like; yat--that; mohat--by illusion;karisyasi--you will act; avasah--imperceptibly; api--even; tat--that.
TRANSLATION
Under illusion you are now declining to act according to My direction.
But, compelled by your own nature, you will act all the same, O son ofKunti.
PURPORTIf one refuses to act under the direction of the Supreme Lord, then he
is compelled to act by the modes in which he is situated. Everyone isunder the spell of a particular combination of the modes of nature andis acting in that way. But anyone who voluntarily engages himself underthe direction of the Supreme Lord becomes glorious.
TEXT 61
isvarah sarva-bhutanam
hrd-dese 'rjuna tisthatibhramayan sarva-bhutaniyantrarudhani mayaya
SYNONYMSisvarah--the Supreme Lord; sarva-bhutanam--of all living entities; hrt-
dese--in the location of the heart; arjuna--O Arjuna; tisthati--resides; bhramayan--causing to travel; sarva-bhutani--all livingentities; yantra--machine; arudhani--being so placed; mayaya--under thespell of material energy.
TRANSLATIONThe Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna, and is
directing the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on amachine, made of the material energy.
PURPORTArjuna was not the supreme knower, and his decision to fight or not to
fight was confined to his limited discretion. Lord Krsna instructedthat the individual is not all in all. The Supreme Personality ofGodhead, or He Himself, Krsna, the localized Supersoul, sits in theheart directing the living being. After changing bodies, the livingentity forgets his past deeds, but the Supersoul, as the knower of thepast, present and future, remains the witness of all his activities.Therefore all the activities of living entities are directed by thisSupersoul. The living entity gets what he deserves and is carried bythe material body, which is created in the material energy under thedirection of the Supersoul. As soon as a living entity is placed in aparticular type of body, he has to work under the spell of that bodilysituation. A person seated in a high-speed motorcar goes faster thanone seated in a slower car, though the living entities, the drivers,may be the same. Similarly, by the order of the Supreme Soul, materialnature fashions a particular type of body to a particular type ofliving entity to work according to his past desires. The living entityis not independent. One should not think himself independent of theSupreme Personality of Godhead. The individual is always under His
control. Therefore his duty is to surrender, and that is the injunction
of the next verse.
TEXT 62
tam eva saranam gaccha
sarva-bhavena bharatatat-prasadat param santimsthanam prapsyasi sasvatam
SYNONYMStam--unto Him; eva--certainly; saranam--surrender; gaccha--go; sarva-
bhavena--in all respects; bharata--O son of Bharata; tat-prasadat--byHis grace; param--transcendental; santim--in peace; sthanam--abode;prapsyasi--you will get; sasvatam--eternal.
TRANSLATIONO scion of Bharata, surrender unto Him utterly. By His grace you will
attain transcendental peace and the supreme and eternal abode.
PURPORTA living entity should therefore surrender unto the Supreme Personality
of Godhead who is situated in everyone's heart, and that will relievehim from all kinds of miseries of this material existence. By suchsurrender, one will not only be released from all miseries in thislife, but at the end he will reach the Supreme God. The transcendentalworld is described in the Vedic literature (Rg Veda 1.22.20) as tadvisnoh paramam padam. Since all of creation is the kingdom of God,everything material is actually spiritual, but paramam padamspecifically refers to the eternal abode, which is called the spiritualsky or Vaikuntha.In the Fifteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gita it is stated, sarvasya cahamhrdi sannivistah: the Lord is seated in everyone's heart, so thisrecommendation that one should surrender unto the Supersoul sittingwithin means that one should surrender unto the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, Krsna. Krsna has already been accepted by Arjuna as theSupreme. He was accepted in the Tenth Chapter as param brahma paramdhama. Arjuna has accepted Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godheadand the supreme abode of all living entities, not only because of hispersonal experience but also because of the evidence of greatauthorities like Narada, Asita, Devala and Vyasa.
TEXT 63
iti te jnanam akhyatam
guhyad guhyataram mayavimrsyaitad asesenayathecchasi tatha kuru
SYNONYMSiti--thus; te--unto you; jnanam--knowledge; akhyatam--described;
guhyat--confidential; guhya-taram--still more confidential; maya--byMe; vimrsya--by deliberation; etat--that; asesena--fully; yatha--asyou; icchasi--you like; tatha--that; kuru--perform.
TRANSLATION
Thus I have explained to you the most confidential of all knowledge.
Deliberate on this fully, and then do what you wish to do.
PURPORTThe Lord has already explained to Arjuna the knowledge of brahma-bhuta.
One who is in the brahma-bhuta condition is joyful; he never laments,nor does he desire anything. That is due to confidential knowledge.Krsna also discloses knowledge of the Supersoul. This is also Brahmanknowledge, knowledge of Brahman, but it is superior.Here Lord Krsna tells Arjuna that he can do as he chooses. God does notinterfere with the little independence of the living entity. InBhagavad-gita, the Lord has explained in all respects how one canelevate his living condition. The best advice imparted to Arjuna is tosurrender unto the Supersoul seated within his heart. By rightdiscrimination, one should agree to act according to the order of theSupersoul. That will help one become situated constantly in Krsnaconsciousness, the highest perfectional stage of human life. Arjuna isbeing directly ordered by the Personality of Godhead to fight.Surrender to the Supreme Personality of Godhead is in the best interestof the living entities. It is not for the interest of the Supreme.Before surrendering, one is free to deliberate on this subject as faras the intelligence goes; that is the best way to accept theinstruction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such instructioncomes also through the spiritual master, the bona fide representativeof Krsna.
TEXT 64
sarva-guhyatamam bhuyah
srnu me paramam vacahisto 'si me drdham ititato vaksyami te hitam
SYNONYMSsarva-guhya-tamam--the most confidential of all; bhuyah--again; srnu--
just hear; me--from Me; paramam--the supreme; vacah--instruction; istahasi--you are very dear to Me; me--of Me; drdham--very; iti--thus;tatah--therefore; vaksyami--I am speaking; te--for your; hitam--benefit.
TRANSLATIONBecause you are My very dear friend, I am speaking to you My supreme
instruction, the most confidential knowledge of all. Hear this from Me,for it is for your benefit.
PURPORTThe Lord has given Arjuna confidential knowledge of the Supersoul
within everyone's heart, and now He is giving the most confidentialpart of this knowledge: just surrender unto the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. At the end of the Ninth Chapter He has said, man-manah: "Justalways think of Me." The same instruction is repeated here to stress
the essence of the teachings of Bhagavad-gita. This essence is not
understood by a common man, but by one who is actually very dear toKrsna, a pure devotee of Krsna. This is the most important instructionin all Vedic literature. What Krsna is saying in this connection is themost essential part of knowledge, and it should be carried out not onlyby Arjuna but by all living entities.
TEXT 65
man-mana bhava mad-bhakto
mad-yaji mam namaskurumam evaisyasi satyam tepratijane priyo 'si me
SYNONYMSmat-manah--thinking of Me; bhava--just become; mat-bhaktah--My devotee;
mat-yaji--My worshiper; mam--unto Me; namaskuru--offer your obeisances;mam--unto Me; eva--certainly; esyasi--come; satyam--truly; te--to you;pratijane--I promise; priyah--dear; asi--you are; me--Mine.
TRANSLATIONAlways think of Me and become My devotee. Worship Me and offer your
homage unto Me. Thus you will come to Me without fail. I promise youthis because you are My very dear friend.
PURPORTThe most confidential part of knowledge is that one should become a
pure devotee of Krsna and always think of Him and act for Him. Oneshould not become an official meditator. Life should be so molded thatone will always have the chance to think of Krsna. One should alwaysact in such a way that all his daily activities are in connection withKrsna. He should arrange his life in such a way that throughout thetwenty-four hours he cannot but think of Krsna. And the Lord's promiseis that anyone who is in such pure Krsna consciousness will certainlyreturn to the abode of Krsna, where he will be engaged in theassociation of Krsna face to face. This most confidential part ofknowledge is spoken to Arjuna because he is the dear friend of Krsna.Everyone who follows the path of Arjuna can become a dear friend toKrsna and obtain the same perfection as Arjuna.These words stress that one should concentrate his mind upon Krsna--thevery form with two hands carrying a flute, the bluish boy with abeautiful face and peacock feathers in His hair. There are descriptionsof Krsna found in the Brahma-samhita and other literatures. One shouldfix his mind on this original form of Godhead, Krsna. He should noteven divert his attention to other forms of the Lord. The Lord hasmultiforms as Visnu, Narayana, Rama, Varaha, etc., but a devotee shouldconcentrate his mind on the form that was present before Arjuna.Concentration of the mind on the form of Krsna constitutes the mostconfidential part of knowledge, and this is disclosed to Arjuna becauseArjuna is the most dear friend of Krsna's.
TEXT 66
sarva-dharman parityajya
mam ekam saranam vraja
aham tvam sarva-papebhyo
moksayisyami ma sucah
SYNONYMSsarva-dharman--all varieties of religion; parityajya--abandoning; mam--
unto Me; ekam--only; saranam--surrender; vraja--go; aham--I; tvam--you;sarva--all; papebhyah--from sinful reactions; moksayisyami--deliver;ma--not; sucah--worry.
TRANSLATIONAbandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall
deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear.
PURPORTThe Lord has described various kinds of knowledge, processes of
religion, knowledge of the Supreme Brahman, knowledge of the Supersoul,knowledge of the different types of orders and statuses of social life,knowledge of the renounced order of life, knowledge of nonattachment,sense and mind control, meditation, etc. He has described in so manyways different types of religion. Now, in summarizing Bhagavad-gita,the Lord says that Arjuna should give up all the processes that havebeen explained to him; he should simply surrender to Krsna. Thatsurrender will save him from all kinds of sinful reactions, for theLord personally promises to protect him.In the Seventh Chapter it was said that only one who has become freefrom all sinful reactions can take to the worship of Lord Krsna. Thusone may think that unless he is free from all sinful reactions hecannot take to the surrendering process. To such doubts it is here saidthat even if one is not free from all sinful reactions, simply by theprocess of surrendering to Sri Krsna he is automatically freed. Thereis no need of strenuous effort to free oneself from sinful reactions.One should unhesitatingly accept Krsna as the supreme savior of allliving entities. With faith and love, one should surrender unto Him.According to the devotional process, one should simply accept suchreligious principles that will lead ultimately to the devotionalservice of the Lord. One may perform a particular occupational dutyaccording to his position in the social order, but if by executing hisduty one does not come to the point of Krsna consciousness, all hisactivities are in vain. Anything that does not lead to the perfectionalstage of Krsna consciousness should be avoided. One should be confidentthat in all circumstances Krsna will protect him from all difficulties.There is no need of thinking how one should keep the body and soultogether. Krsna will see to that. One should always think himselfhelpless and should consider Krsna the only basis for his progress inlife. As soon as one seriously engages himself in devotional service tothe Lord in full Krsna consciousness, at once he becomes freed from allcontamination of material nature. There are different processes ofreligion and purificatory processes by cultivation of knowledge,meditation in the mystic yoga system, etc., but one who surrenders untoKrsna does not have to execute so many methods. That simple surrenderunto Krsna will save him from unnecessarily wasting time. One can thusmake all progress at once and be freed from all sinful reaction.One should be attracted by the beautiful vision of Krsna. His name isKrsna because He is all-attractive. One who becomes attracted by thebeautiful, all-powerful, omnipotent vision of Krsna is fortunate. There
are different kinds of transcendentalists--some of them are attached to
the impersonal Brahman vision, some of them are attracted by theSupersoul feature, etc., but one who is attracted to the personalfeature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and, above all, one whois attracted by the Supreme Personality of Godhead as Krsna Himself, isthe most perfect transcendentalist. In other words, devotional serviceto Krsna, in full consciousness, is the most confidential part ofknowledge, and this is the essence of the whole Bhagavad-gita. Karma-yogis, empiric philosophers, mystics, and devotees are all calledtranscendentalists, but one who is a pure devotee is the best of all.The particular words used here, ma sucah, "Don't fear, don't hesitate,don't worry," are very significant. One may be perplexed as to how onecan give up all kinds of religious forms and simply surrender untoKrsna, but such worry is useless.
TEXT 67
idam te natapaskaya
nabhaktaya kadacanana casusrusave vacyamna ca mam yo 'bhyasuyati
SYNONYMSidam--this; te--you; na--never; atapaskaya--one who is not austere; na-
-never; abhaktaya--one who is not a devotee; kadacana--at any time; na--never; ca--also; asusrusave--one who is not engaged in devotionalservice; vacyam--to be spoken; na--never; ca--also; mam--unto Me; yah--anyone; abhyasuyati--envious.
TRANSLATIONThis confidential knowledge may not be explained to those who are not
austere, or devoted, or engaged in devotional service, nor to one whois envious of Me.
PURPORTPersons who have not undergone the austerities of the religious
process, who have never attempted devotional service in Krsnaconsciousness, who have not tended a pure devotee, and especially thosewho are conscious of Krsna as a historical personality or who areenvious of the greatness of Krsna, should not be told this mostconfidential part of knowledge. It is, however, sometimes found thateven demoniac persons who are envious of Krsna, worshiping Krsna in adifferent way, take to the profession of explaining Bhagavad-gita in adifferent way to make business, but anyone who desires actually tounderstand Krsna must avoid such commentaries on Bhagavad-gita.Actually the purpose of Bhagavad-gita is not understandable to thosewho are sensuous--even if one is not sensuous but is strictly followingthe disciplines enjoined in the Vedic scripture, if he is not adevotee, he also cannot understand Krsna. Even when one poses himselfas a devotee of Krsna, but is not engaged in Krsna consciousactivities, he also cannot understand Krsna. There are many persons whoenvy Krsna because He has explained in Bhagavad-gita that He is theSupreme and that nothing is above Him or equal to Him. There are manypersons who are envious of Krsna. Such persons should not be told ofBhagavad-gita, for they cannot understand. There is no possibility of
faithless persons' understanding Bhagavad-gita and Krsna. Without
understanding Krsna from the authority of a pure devotee, one shouldnot try to comment upon Bhagavad-gita.
TEXT 68
ya idam paramam guhyam
mad-bhaktesv abhidhasyatibhaktim mayi param krtvamam evaisyaty asamsayah
SYNONYMSyah--anyone; idam--this; paramam--most; guhyam--confidential; mat--
Mine; bhaktesu--amongst devotees of; abhidhasyati--explains; bhaktim--devotional service; mayi--unto Me; param--transcendental; krtva--havingdone; mam--unto Me; eva--certainly; esyati--comes; asamsayah--withoutdoubt.
TRANSLATIONFor one who explains the supreme secret to the devotees, devotional
service is guaranteed, and at the end he will come back to Me.
PURPORTGenerally it is advised that Bhagavad-gita be discussed amongst the
devotees only, for those who are not devotees will neither understandKrsna nor Bhagavad-gita. Those who do not accept Krsna as He is andBhagavad-gita as it is should not try to explain Bhagavad-gitawhimsically and become offenders. Bhagavad-gita should be explained topersons who are ready to accept Krsna as the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. It is a subject matter for the devotees only and not forphilosophical speculators. Anyone, however, who tries sincerely topresent Bhagavad-gita as it is will advance in devotional activitiesand reach the pure devotional state of life. As a result of such puredevotion, he is sure to go back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 69
na ca tasman manusyesu
kascin me priya-krttamahbhavita na ca me tasmadanyah priyataro bhuvi
SYNONYMSna--never; ca--and; tasmat--therefore; manusyesu--among mankind;
kascit--anyone; me--My; priya-krt-tamah--more dear; bhavita--willbecome; na--nor; ca--and; me--My; tasmat--than him; anyah--other;priya-tarah--dearer; bhuvi--in this world.
TRANSLATIONThere is no servant in this world more dear to Me than he, nor will
there ever be one more dear.
TEXT 70
adhyesyate ca ya imam
dharmyam samvadam avayohjnana-yajnena tenahamistah syam iti me matih
SYNONYMSadhyesyate--will study; ca--also; yah--he; imam--this; dharmyam--
sacred; samvadam--conversation; avayoh--of ours; jnana--knowledge;yajnena--by sacrifice; tena--by him; aham--I; istah--worshiped; syam--shall be; iti--thus; me--My; matih--opinion.
TRANSLATIONAnd I declare that he who studies this sacred conversation worships Me
by his intelligence.
TEXT 71
sraddhavan anasuyas ca
srnuyad api yo narahso 'pi muktah subhal lokanprapnuyat punya-karmanam
SYNONYMSsraddha-van--faithful; anasuyah ca--and not envious; srnuyat--does
hear; api--certainly; yah--who; narah--a man; sah--he; api--also;muktah--being liberated; subhan--auspicious; lokan--planets; prapnuyat--attains; punya-karmanam--of the pious.
TRANSLATIONAnd one who listens with faith and without envy becomes free from
sinful reactions and attains to the planets where the pious dwell.
PURPORTIn the 67th verse of this chapter, the Lord explicitly forbade the
Gita's being spoken to those who are envious of the Lord. In otherwords, Bhagavad-gita is for the devotees only. But it so happens thatsometimes a devotee of the Lord will hold open class, and in that classall the students are not expected to be devotees. Why do such personshold open class? It is explained here that although everyone is not adevotee, still there are many men who are not envious of Krsna. Theyhave faith in Him as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If suchpersons hear from a bona fide devotee about the Lord, the result isthat they become at once free from all sinful reactions and after thatattain to the planetary system where all righteous persons aresituated. Therefore simply by hearing Bhagavad-gita, even a person whodoes not try to be a pure devotee attains the result of righteousactivities. Thus a pure devotee of the Lord gives everyone a chance tobecome free from all sinful reactions and to become a devotee of theLord.Generally those who are free from sinful reactions, those who arerighteous, very easily take to Krsna consciousness. The word punya-karmanam is very significant here. This refers to the performance of
great sacrifices. Those who are righteous in performing devotional
service but who are not pure can attain the planetary system of thepolestar, or Dhruvaloka, where Dhruva Maharaja is presiding. He is agreat devotee of the Lord, and he has a special planet which is calledthe polestar.
TEXT 72
kaccid etac chrutam partha
tvayaikagrena cetasakaccid ajnana-sammohahpranastas te dhananjaya
SYNONYMSkaccit--whether; etat--this; srutam--heard; partha--O son of Prtha;
tvaya--by you; eka-agrena--with full attention; cetasa--by the mind;kaccit--whether; ajnana--ignorant; sammohah--illusion; pranastah--dispelled; te--of you; dhananjaya--O conqueror of wealth (Arjuna).
TRANSLATIONO conqueror of wealth, Arjuna, have you heard this attentively with
your mind? And are your illusions and ignorance now dispelled?
PURPORTThe Lord was acting as the spiritual master of Arjuna. Therefore it was
His duty to inquire from Arjuna whether he understood the wholeBhagavad-gita in its proper perspective. If not, the Lord was ready tore-explain any point, or the whole Bhagavad-gita if so required.Actually, anyone who hears Bhagavad-gita from a bona fide spiritualmaster like Krsna or His representative will find that all hisignorance is dispelled. Bhagavad-gita is not an ordinary book writtenby a poet or fiction writer; it is spoken by the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. Any person, if he is fortunate enough to hear these teachingsfrom Krsna or from His bona fide spiritual representative, is sure tobecome a liberated person and get out of the darkness of ignorance.
TEXT 73
arjuna uvaca
nasto mohah smrtir labdhatvat-prasadan mayacyutasthito 'smi gata-sandehahkarisye vacanam tava
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; nastah--dispelled; mohah--illusion; smrtih-
-memory; labdha--regained; tvat-prasadat--by Your mercy; maya--by me;acyuta--O infallible Krsna; sthitah--situated; asmi--I am; gata--removed; sandehah--all doubts; karisye--I shall execute; vacanam--order; tava--Your.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: My dear Krsna, O infallible one, my illusion is now gone.
I have regained my memory by Your mercy, and I am now firm and freefrom doubt and am prepared to act according to Your instructions.
PURPORTThe constitutional position of a living entity, represented by Arjuna,
is that he has to act according to the order of the Supreme Lord. He ismeant for self-discipline. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu says that the actualposition of the living entity is that of eternal servant of the SupremeLord. Forgetting this principle, the living entity becomes conditionedby material nature, but in serving the Supreme Lord, he becomes theliberated servant of God. The living entity's constitutional positionis to be a servitor; he has to serve either the illusory maya or theSupreme Lord. If he serves the Supreme Lord, he is in his normalcondition, but if he prefers to serve the illusory external energy,then certainly he will be in bondage. In illusion the living entity isserving in this material world. He is bound by his lust and desires,yet he thinks of himself as the master of the world. This is calledillusion. When a person is liberated, his illusion is over, and hevoluntarily surrenders unto the Supreme to act according to Hisdesires. The last illusion, the last snare of maya to trap the livingentity, is the proposition that he is God. The living entity thinksthat he is no longer a conditioned soul, but God. He is sounintelligent that he does not think that if he were God, then howcould he be in doubt? That he does not consider. So that is the lastsnare of illusion. Actually to become free from the illusory energy isto understand Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and agree toact according to His order.The word moha is very important in this verse. Moha refers to thatwhich is opposed to knowledge. Actually real knowledge is theunderstanding that every living being is eternally a servitor of theLord, but instead of thinking oneself in that position, the livingentity thinks that he is not a servant, that he is the master of thismaterial world, for he wants to lord it over the material nature. Thatis his illusion. This illusion can be overcome by the mercy of the Lordor by the mercy of a pure devotee. When that illusion is over, oneagrees to act in Krsna consciousness.Krsna consciousness is acting according to Krsna's order. A conditionedsoul illusioned by the external energy of matter does not know that theSupreme Lord is the master who is full of knowledge and who is theproprietor of everything. Whatever He desires He can bestow upon Hisdevotees; He is the friend of everyone, and He is especially inclinedto His devotee. He is the controller of this material nature and of allliving entities. He is also the controller of inexhaustible time, andHe is full of all opulences and potencies. The Supreme Personality ofGodhead can even give Himself to the devotee. One who does not know Himis under the spell of illusion; he does not become a devotee, but aservitor of maya. Arjuna, however, after hearing Bhagavad-gita from theSupreme Personality of Godhead, became free from all illusion. He couldunderstand that Krsna was not only his friend, but the SupremePersonality of Godhead. And he understood Krsna factually. So to studyBhagavad-gita is to understand Krsna factually. When a person is infull knowledge, he naturally surrenders to Krsna. When Arjunaunderstood that it was Krsna's plan to reduce the unnecessary increaseof population, he agreed to fight according to Krsna's desire. He againtook up his weapons--his arrows and bow--to fight under the order ofthe Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 74
sanjaya uvaca
ity aham vasudevasyaparthasya ca mahatmanahsamvadam imam asrausamadbhutam roma-harsanam
SYNONYMSsanjayah uvaca--Sanjaya said; iti--thus; aham--I; vasudevasya--of
Krsna; parthasya--of Arjuna; ca--also; maha-atmanah--two great souls;samvadam--discussing; imam--this; asrausam--heard; adbhutam--wonder;roma-harsanam--hair standing on end.
TRANSLATIONSanjaya said: Thus have I heard the conversation of two great souls,
Krsna and Arjuna. And so wonderful is that message that my hair isstanding on end.
PURPORTIn the beginning of Bhagavad-gita, Dhrtarastra inquired from his
secretary Sanjaya, "What happened in the Battlefield of Kuruksetra?"The entire study was related to the heart of Sanjaya by the grace ofhis spiritual master, Vyasa. He thus explained the theme of thebattlefield. The conversation was wonderful because such an importantconversation between two great souls never took place before and wouldnot take place again. It is wonderful because the Supreme Personalityof Godhead is speaking about Himself and His energies to the livingentity, Arjuna, a great devotee of the Lord. If we follow in thefootsteps of Arjuna to understand Krsna, then our life will be happyand successful. Sanjaya realized this, and as he began to understandit, he related the conversation to Dhrtarastra. Now it is concludedthat wherever there is Krsna and Arjuna, there is victory.
TEXT 75
vyasa-prasadac chrutavan
etad guhyam aham paramyogam yogesvarat krsnatsaksat kathayatah svayam
SYNONYMSvyasa-prasadat--by the mercy of Vyasadeva; srutavan--heard; etat--this;
guhyam--confidential; aham--I; param--the supreme; yogam--mysticism;yoga-isvarat--from the master of all mysticism; krsnat--from Krsna;saksat--directly; kathayatah--speaking; svayam--personally.
TRANSLATIONBy the mercy of Vyasa, I have heard these most confidential talks
directly from the master of all mysticism, Krsna, who was speakingpersonally to Arjuna.
PURPORT
Vyasa was the spiritual master of Sanjaya, and Sanjaya admits that it
was by his mercy that he could understand the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. This means that one has to understand Krsna not directly butthrough the medium of the spiritual master. The spiritual master is thetransparent medium, although it is true that the experience is direct.This is the mystery of the disciplic succession. When the spiritualmaster is bona fide, then one can hear Bhagavad-gita directly, asArjuna heard it. There are many mystics and yogis all over the world,but Krsna is the master of all yoga systems. Krsna's instruction isexplicitly stated in Bhagavad-gita--surrender unto Krsna. One who doesso is the topmost yogi. This is confirmed in the last verse of theSixth Chapter. Yoginam api sarvesam.Narada is the direct disciple of Krsna and the spiritual master ofVyasa. Therefore Vyasa is as bona fide as Arjuna because he comes inthe disciplic succession, and Sanjaya is the direct disciple of Vyasa.Therefore by the grace of Vyasa, his senses were purified, and he couldsee and hear Krsna directly. One who directly hears Krsna canunderstand this confidential knowledge. If one does not come to thedisciplic succession, he cannot hear Krsna; therefore his knowledge isalways imperfect, at least as far as understanding Bhagavad-gita isconcerned.In Bhagavad-gita, all the yoga systems, karma-yoga, jnana-yoga andbhakti-yoga, are explained. Krsna is the master of all such mysticism.It is to be understood, however, that as Arjuna was fortunate enough tounderstand Krsna directly, similarly, by the grace of Vyasa, Sanjayawas also able to hear Krsna directly. Actually there is no differencebetween hearing directly from Krsna and hearing directly from Krsna viaa bona fide spiritual master like Vyasa. The spiritual master is therepresentative of Vyasadeva also. According to the Vedic system, on thebirthday of the spiritual master, the disciples conduct the ceremonycalled Vyasa-puja.
TEXT 76
rajan samsmrtya samsmrtya
samvadam imam adbhutamkesavarjunayoh punyamhrsyami ca muhur muhuh
SYNONYMSrajan--O King; samsmrtya--remembering; samsmrtya--remembering;
samvadam--message; imam--this; adbhutam--wonderful; kesava--Lord Krsna;arjunayoh--and Arjuna; punyam--pious; hrsyami--taking pleasure; ca--also; muhuh muhuh--always, repeatedly.
TRANSLATIONO King, as I repeatedly recall this wondrous and holy dialogue between
Krsna and Arjuna, I take pleasure, being thrilled at every moment.
PURPORTThe understanding of Bhagavad-gita is so transcendental that anyone who
becomes conversant with the topics of Arjuna and Krsna becomesrighteous, and he cannot forget such talks. This is the transcendental
position of spiritual life. In other words, one who hears the Gita from
the right source, directly from Krsna, attains full Krsnaconsciousness. The result of Krsna consciousness is that one becomesincreasingly enlightened, and he enjoys life with a thrill, not onlyfor some time, but at every moment.
TEXT 77
tac ca samsmrtya samsmrtya
rupam aty-adbhutam harehvismayo me mahan rajanhrsyami ca punah punah
SYNONYMStat--that; ca--also; samsmrtya--remembering; samsmrtya--remembering;
rupam--form; ati--great; adbhutam--wonderful; hareh--of Lord Krsna;vismayah--wonder; me--my; mahan--great; rajan--O King; hrsyami--enjoying; ca--also; punah punah--repeatedly.
TRANSLATIONO King, when I remember the wonderful form of Lord Krsna, I am struck
with even greater wonder, and I rejoice again and again.
PURPORTIt appears that Sanjaya also, by the grace of Vyasa, could see the
universal form Krsna exhibited to Arjuna. It is, of course, said thatLord Krsna had never exhibited such a form before. It was exhibited toArjuna only, yet some great devotees could also see the universal formof Krsna when it was shown to Arjuna, and Vyasa was one of them. He isone of the great devotees of the Lord, and he is considered to be apowerful incarnation of Krsna. Vyasa disclosed this to his discipleSanjaya, who remembered that wonderful form of Krsna exhibited toArjuna and enjoyed it repeatedly.
yatra yogesvarah krsno
yatra partho dhanur-dharahtatra srir vijayo bhutirdhruva nitir matir mama
SYNONYMSyatra--where; yoga-isvarah--the master of mysticism; krsnah--Lord
Krsna; yatra--where; parthah--the son of Prtha; dhanuh-dharah--thecarrier of the bow and arrow; tatra--there; srih--opulence; vijayah--victory; bhutih--exceptional power; dhruva--certain; nitih--morality;matih mama--is my opinion.
TRANSLATIONWherever there is Krsna, the master of all mystics, and wherever there
is Arjuna, the supreme archer, there will also certainly be opulence,victory, extraordinary power, and morality. That is my opinion.
PURPORT
The Bhagavad-gita began with an inquiry of Dhrtarastra. He was hopeful
of the victory of his sons, assisted by great warriors like Bhisma,Drona and Karna. He was hopeful that the victory would be on his side.But, after describing the scene on the battlefield, Sanjaya told theKing, "You are thinking of victory, but my opinion is that where Krsnaand Arjuna are present, there will be all good fortune." He directlyconfirmed that Dhrtarastra could not expect victory for his side.Victory was certain for the side of Arjuna because Krsna was there.Krsna's acceptance of the post of charioteer for Arjuna was anexhibition of another opulence. Krsna is full of all opulences, andrenunciation is one of them. There are many instances of suchrenunciation, for Krsna is also the master of renunciation.The fight was actually between Duryodhana and Yudhisthira. Arjuna wasfighting on behalf of his elder brother, Yudhisthira. Because Krsna andArjuna were on the side of Yudhisthira, Yudhisthira's victory wascertain. The battle was to decide who would rule the world, and Sanjayapredicted that the power would be transferred to Yudhisthira. It isalso predicted here that Yudhisthira, after gaining victory in thisbattle, would flourish more and more because he was not only righteousand pious, but he was a strict moralist. He never spoke a lie duringhis life.There are many less intelligent persons who take Bhagavad-gita to be adiscussion of topics between two friends in a battlefield. But such abook cannot be scripture. Some may protest that Krsna incited Arjuna tofight, which is immoral, but the reality of the situation is clearlystated: Bhagavad-gita is the supreme instruction in morality. Thesupreme instruction of morality is stated in the Ninth Chapter, in thethirty-fourth verse: man-mana bhava mad-bhaktah. One must become adevotee of Krsna, and the essence of all religion is to surrender untoKrsna, as stated, Sarva-dharman. The instructions of Bhagavad-gitaconstitute the supreme process of religion and of morality. All otherprocesses may be purifying and may lead to this process, but the lastinstruction of the Gita is the last word in all morality and religion:surrender unto Krsna. This is the verdict of the Eighteenth Chapter.From Bhagavad-gita we can understand that to realize oneself byphilosophical speculation and by meditation is one process, but tofully surrender unto Krsna is the highest perfection. This is theessence of the teachings of Bhagavad-gita. The path of regulativeprinciples according to the orders of social life and according to thedifferent courses of religion may be a confidential path of knowledgein as far as the rituals of religion are confidential, but one is stillinvolved with meditation and cultivation of knowledge. Surrender untoKrsna in devotional service in full Krsna consciousness is the mostconfidential instruction and is the essence of the Eighteenth Chapter.Another feature of Bhagavad-gita is that the actual truth is theSupreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. Absolute Truth is realized inthree features--impersonal Brahman, localized Paramatma, and theSupreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. Perfect knowledge of theAbsolute Truth means perfect knowledge of Krsna. If one understandsKrsna, then all the departments of knowledge are part and parcel ofthat understanding. Krsna is transcendental, for He is always situatedin His eternal internal potency. The living entities are manifested andare divided into two classes, eternally conditioned and eternallyliberated. Such living entities are innumerable, and they areconsidered fundamental parts of Krsna. Material energy is manifestedinto twenty-four divisions. The creation is effected by eternal time,and it is created and dissolved by external energy. This manifestationof the cosmic world repeatedly becomes visible and invisible.
In Bhagavad-gita five principal subject matters have been discussed:
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, material nature, the livingentities, eternal time and all kinds of activities. All of these aredependent on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. All conceptionsof the Absolute Truth, namely, impersonal Brahman, localized Paramatma,or any other transcendental conception, exist within the category ofunderstanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Althoughsuperficially the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the living entity,material nature and time appear to be different, nothing is differentfrom the Supreme. But the Supreme is always different from everything.Lord Caitanya's philosophy is that of "inconceivably one anddifferent." This system of philosophy constitutes perfect knowledge ofthe Absolute Truth.The living entity in his original position is pure spirit. He is justlike an atomic particle of the Supreme Spirit. The conditioned livingentity, however, is the marginal energy of the Lord; he tends to be incontact with both the material energy and the spiritual energy. Inother words, the living entity is situated between the two energies ofthe Lord, and because he belongs to the superior energy of the Lord, hehas a particle of independence. By proper use of that independence hecomes under the direct order of Krsna. Thus he attains his normalcondition in the pleasure-giving potency.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Eighteenth Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of its Conclusion--the Perfection ofRenunciation.
“Bhagavad-gita As It Is ” by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of
this book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended forpersonal non-commercial use only, under the “fair use” guidelinesestablished by international copyright laws. You may use thiselectronic file to evaluate the printed version of this book, for yourown private use, or for short excerpts used in academic works,research, student papers, presentations, and the like. You candistribute this evaluation copy to others over the Internet, so long asyou keep this copyright information intact. You may not reproduce morethan ten percent (10%) of this book in any media without the expresswritten permission from the copyright holders. Reference any excerptsin the following way: “Excerpted from “Bhagavad-gita As It Is” by A.C.Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta BookTrust International, www.Krishna.com .”
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1972-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or toevaluate dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website ofthe publishers, www.Krishna.com .
