Name: ___________________________________________ Date: ___________________
Bhagavad-gita-chapter-7
1. how one can know everything in full? BG 7.1
By practice of K ṛṣṇ a consciousness yoga, one can know everything in full
2. Name the things one can know by practice of K ṛṣṇ a consciousness yoga? BG 7.1
namely the Absolute Truth, the living entities, the material nature, and their manifestations with paraphernalia.
3. What is the greatest opportunity to become a perfectly K ṛṣṇ a conscious person? BG 7.1
by hearing from Lord one receives the greatest opportunity to become a perfectly K ṛṣṇ a conscious person.
4. What is righteous activity? BG 7.1
To hear about K ṛṣṇ a from Vedic literatures, or to hear from Him directly through the Bhagavad-gītā, is itself righteous activity.
5. In what way a devotee naturally develops his dormant transcendental knowledge? BG 7.1
one who hears about K ṛṣṇ a, Lord K ṛṣṇ a, who is dwelling in everyone’s heart, acts as a best-wishing friend and puriﬁes the
devotee who constantly engages in hearing of Him.
6. In what way the candidate remains steady in his position of pure goodness the science of God perfectly? BG 7.1
When material lusts and avarice are diminished these impurities are wiped away the candidate remains steady in his position of
pure goodness
7. What is the Complete knowledge? BG 7.2
The Complete knowledge includes knowledge of the phenomenal world, the spirit behind it, and the source of both of them. This
is transcendental knowledge.
8. When nothing remains unknown? BG 7.2
When the cause of all causes becomes known, then everything knowable becomes known, and nothing remains unknown.
9. What Generally mankind is engaged in? BG 7.3
Generally mankind is simply engaged in the animal propensities, namely eating, sleeping, defending and mating,
10. For what kind of people bhakti may be easy? BG 7.3
The so-called path of bhakti practiced by unauthorized persons without knowledge of bhakti may be easy,
11. What kind of people fall away from the path? BG 7.3
when it is practiced factually according to the rules and regulations, the speculative scholars and philosophers fall away from the
path.
12. Why Lord says Such a great soul is very rare? BG 7.3
Lord says No one knows Me as I am And if one does know Such a great soul is very rare
13. According to Lord which are 8 separated material energies? BG 7.4
Earth, water, ﬁre, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego
14. What is called prak ṛ ti? BG 7.4
The science of God analyzes the constitutional position of God and His diverse energies. Material nature is called prak ṛ ti,
15. What is called mahat-tattva? BG 7.4
Mahā-vi ṣṇ u, creates the total material energy, known as the mahat-tattva.
16. Where did the second vishnu enters in? BG 7.4
The second, Garbhodaka-śāyī Vi ṣṇ u, enters into all the universes to create diversities in each of them.
17. What is the third vishnu known as? BG 7.4
The third, K ṣ īrodaka-śāyī Vi ṣṇ u, is diffused as the all-pervading Supersoul in all the universes and is known as Paramātmā.
18. Who can be liberated from material entanglement? BG 7.4
Anyone who knows these three Vi ṣṇ us can be liberated from material entanglement.”
19. What is puru ṣ as are called? BG 7.4
puru ṣ as are called incarnations.
20. What are called the ﬁve gigantic creations or the gross creations ? BG 7.4
the ﬁrst ﬁve manifestations, namely earth, water, ﬁre, air and sky, are called the ﬁve gigantic creations or the gross creations,
21. the eight separated energies of the Lord are manifest howmany elements of material world? Bg 7.4
the eight separated energies of the Lord are manifest the twenty-four elements of the material world,
22. Where do the living entities belong to? BG 7.5
living entities belong to the superior nature (or energy) of the Supreme Lord.
23. What are products of the inferior energy? BG 7.5
gross (earth, etc.) and subtle (mind, etc.)
24. Who is superior energy of the Supreme Lord? BG 7.5
The living entities, who are exploiting these inferior energies for different purposes, are the superior energy of the Supreme
Lord,
25. What stage is called mukti? BG 7.5
when the living entity becomes free from the inﬂuence of the illusory material energy, he attains the stage called mukti, or
liberation.
26. What the Gītā conﬁrms about living entiti? BG 7.5
the Gītā conﬁrms the living entity to be only one of the multi-energies of K ṛṣṇ a;
27. When the living entity becomes fully K ṛṣṇ a conscious, or liberated? BG 7.5
when this energy is freed from material contamination, it becomes fully K ṛṣṇ a conscious, or liberated
28. I this world what are the two sources of being? BG 7.6
Material and spiritual
29. What is the basic ﬁeld of creation? BG 7.6
Spirit is the basic ﬁeld of creation
30. How matter is created? BG 7.6
matter is created by spirit.
31. How the entire cosmic manifestation of the gigantic universe is developed? BG 7.6
because of the presence of the Supersoul, Vi ṣṇ u.
32. Can living entity be the cause of a big universe? why? BG 7.6
No, the living entity, may be the cause of a big skyscraper, a big factory, or even a big city, but he cannot be the cause of a big
universe.
33. What kind of person suffer the miseries of the material world? BG 7.7
those who do not know Lord suffer the miseries of the material world
34. Who will puts more stress on the word arūpam? BG 7.7
The impersonalist puts more stress on the word arūpam. But this arūpam is not impersonal.
35. How the Supreme Person described as? BG 7.7
He is the supermost. He is smaller than the smallest, and He is greater than the greatest. He is situated as a silent tree, and He
illumines the transcendental sky, and as a tree spreads its roots, He spreads His extensive energies
36. What are the different energies of The Supreme Lord? BG 7.8
pure taste of water is one of the energies of the Lord, The light of the sun and the moon o ṁ -kāra transcendental sound
37. What is Pu ṇ ya means? BG 7.9
Pu ṇya means that which is not decomposed; pu ṇ ya is original.
38. What is Vibhāvasu means? BG 7.9
Vibhāvasu means ﬁre
39. without fire what we cannot do?BG 7.9
Without ﬁre we cannot run factories, we cannot cook, etc., and that ﬁre is K ṛṣṇ a
40. What all material elements are due to K ṛṣṇ a? BG 7.9
earth, water, ﬁre, air and every active principle, all chemicals and all material elements are due to K ṛṣṇ a.
41. What is Bījam means? BG 7.10
Bījam means seed; K ṛṣṇ a is the seed of everything.
42. How many species of life in exist? BG 7.10
8,400,000 species of life
43. Who is the root of all intelligence? BG 7.10
K ṛṣṇa is the root of all intelligence.
44. What Lord says about strength and desire? BG 7.11
Lord says he is the strength of the strong, devoid of passion and desire
45. What are the three modes of material nature? BG 7.12
goodness, passion and ignorance
46. Why Krishna is called Nirguna? BG 7.12
K ṛṣṇa is not subject to material nature. Therefore He is nirgu ṇ a,
47. Who are under the inﬂuence of material nature? BG 7.13
human beings, demigods, animals, etc. – and each and every one of them is under the inﬂuence of material nature,
48. Why living entities are devine? BG 7.14
The Supreme Personality of Godhead has innumerable energies, and all these energies are divine. Although the living entities are
part of His energies and are therefore divine,
49. What is called nitya-baddha? BG 7.14
The conditioned soul is therefore called nitya-baddha, or eternally conditioned.
50. Why material nature is deﬁned as divine nature? BG 7.14
material nature is deﬁned herein as divine nature due to its divine connection and movement by the divine will.
51. Why meaningn of Guna is rope? BG 7.14
Another meaning of gu ṇ a is rope; it is to be understood that the conditioned soul is tightly tied by the ropes of illusion.
52. Why it is not possible to release the conditioned soul from the clutches of māyā? BG 7.14
both Brahmā and Śiva are also under the inﬂuence of māyā. Only Vi ṣṇ u is the master of māyā; therefore He alone can give
release to the conditioned soul.
53. What Lord Śiva says about Lord Vishnu? BG 7.14
There is no doubt that Vi ṣṇ u is the deliverer of liberation for everyone.
54. Who are all really learned leaders of society? give example? BG 7.15
really learned leaders of society like Brahmā, Śiva, Kapila, the Kumāras, Manu, Vyāsa, Devala, Asita, Janaka, Prahlāda, Bali, and
later on Madhvācārya, Rāmānujācārya, Śrī Caitanya and many others
55. What is the word du ṣ k ṛ tina ḥ , or “miscreant? BG 7.15
The atheistic planmakers are described herein by the word du ṣ k ṛ tina ḥ , or “miscreants.
56. What is K ṛ tī means? BG 7.15
K ṛtī means one who has performed meritorious work.
57. what is called du ṣ k ṛ tī
the atheistic planmaker is called du ṣ k ṛ tī, which indicates that his intelligence and efforts are misdirected.
58. What are the four different patterns du ṣ k ṛ tinas, or miscreants? BG 7.15
mū ḍhas, narādhama, māyayāpah ṛ ta-jñānā ḥ , āsura ṁ bhāvam āśritā ḥ
59. Who are called mū ḍ has? BG 7.15
The mū ḍ has are those who are grossly foolish, like hardworking beasts of burden.
60. Who are called the narādhama? BG 7.15
the narādhama, or the lowest of mankind. Nara means human being, and adhama means the lowest.
61. How many species of living beings are there in this world? BG 7.15
8,400,000 different species of living beings in this world.
62. How many human species are there out of 8400000 species? BG 7.15
Out of the 8,400,000 different species of living beings, there are 400,000 human species.
63. Who are considered as narādhamas? BG 7.15
Those who are socially and politically developed but who have no religious principles must be considered narādhamas.
64. What is the percent of the population is narādham? BG 7.15
A. 90% B. 99.9% 
C. 80% D. 60%
65. Who are called māyayāpah ṛ ta-jñānā ḥ ? BG 7.15
those persons whose erudite knowledge has been nulliﬁed by the inﬂuence of illusory material energy. They are mostly very
learned fellows – great philosophers, poets, literati, scientists, etc.
66. Why māyayāpah ṛ ta-jñānā ḥ disobey the Supreme Lord? BG 7.15
the illusory energy misguides them, and therefore they disobey the Supreme Lord.
67. Who are called āsura ṁ bhāvam āśritā ḥ ? BG 7.15
those of demonic principles. This class is openly atheistic. Some of them argue that the Supreme Lord can never descend upon
this material world, but they are unable to give any tangible reasons as to why not.
68. Who are called su-k ṛ tina ḥ ? BG 7.16
those who obey the rules and regulations of scriptures, the moral and social laws, and are, more or less, devoted to the Supreme
Lord
69. Who are four classes of men? BG 7.16
those who are sometimes distressed, those who are in need of money, those who are sometimes inquisitive, and those who are
sometimes searching after knowledge of the Absolute Truth.
70. Who are called a mahātmā, or great soul? BG 7.18
The Lord says that all are magnanimous because anyone who comes to the Lord for any purpose is called a mahātmā, or great
soul.
71. Who is considered very dear to the Lord, why? BG 7.18
the devotee in full knowledge is considered to be very dear to the Lord because his only purpose is to serve the Supreme Lord
with love and devotion.
72. According to Lord what kind of soul is very rare? BG 7.19
After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge surrenders unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and
all that is. Such a great soul is very rare.
73. Why Lord is called entire universe, all that was and will be? BG 7.19
Lord Vi ṣṇ u has thousands of heads, thousands of eyes and thousands of feet. Entirely encompassing the whole universe, He still
extends beyond it by ten ﬁngers’ breadth. He is in fact this entire universe.
74. Who should surrender to Vāsudeva? BG 7.20
whether one is a pure devotee and is free from all material desires, or is full of material desires, or desires liberation from
material contamination, he should in all cases surrender to Vāsudeva and worship Him
75. As the supreme father of all living entities what way Lord give freedom? BG 7.21
if a person desires to have material enjoyment and wants very sincerely to have such facilities from the material demigods, the
Supreme Lord, as Supersoul in everyone’s heart, understands and gives facilities to such persons.
76. When there is no meaning to independence? BG 7.21
if the Supreme Lord as Supersoul does not give such facilities, then there is no meaning to independence.
77. Who are subordinate to the will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead? BG 7.21
Both the living entity and the demigods are subordinate to the will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
78. Why demigods have no independence? BG 7.21
The demigods are actually different parts of the universal body of the Supreme Lord; therefore they have no independence.
79. Where the worshipers of demigods go? BG 7.23
it is clearly stated that the worshipers of demigods go to the different planetary systems where various demigods are situated,
80. Where the devotee of the Supreme Lord goes? BG 7.23
the devotee of the Supreme Lord goes directly to the supreme planet of the Personality of Godhead.
81. What demigod worshipers think? BG 7.23
They do not know that these demigods are different parts of the universal body of the Supreme Lord, and in their ignorance they
believe that each and every demigod is a separate God and a competitor of the Supreme Lord.
82. How the ordinary living entities are part of supreme lord? Bg 7.23
it is stated that the brāhma ṇ as are the head of the Supreme Lord, the k ṣ atriyas are His arms, the vaiśyas are His waist, the
śūdras are His legs,
83. When the knowledge is perfect of living entities? BG 7.23
if one knows that both the demigods and he himself are part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, his knowledge is perfect.
84. It may be argued that since K ṛṣṇ a was visible to everyone when He was present on this earth, how can it be said that He is not manifest to everyone? BG 7.25
But actually He was not manifest to everyone. When K ṛṣṇ a was present there were only a few people who could understand Him
to be the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
85. What is the word meaning avyaya? BG 7.25
inexhaustible
86. What Lord K ṛṣṇ a clearly says? BG 7.26
He completely knows what happened in the past, what is happening in the present, and what will happen in the future.
87. What is the real constitutional position of the living entity? BG 7.27
The real constitutional position of the living entity is that of subordination to the Supreme Lord, who is pure knowledge.
88. What happen When one is deluded into separation from this pure knowledge? BG 7.27
he becomes controlled by the illusory energy and cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
89. What The illusory energy is manifested in to ? BG 7.27
The illusory energy is manifested in the duality of desire and hate.
90. Who think that Supreme Personality of Godhead is created by material energies? BG 7.27
A. those who are deluded by duality and nescience think that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is created by material energies.
91. What will happen to deluded persons? Bg 7.27
deluded persons, symptomatically, dwell in dualities of dishonor and honor, misery and happiness, woman and man, good and
bad, pleasure and pain, etc
92. Who can gradually rise to the pure knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead? BG 7.28
Only those who have passed their lives in practicing the regulative principles of religion, who have acted piously, and who have
conquered sinful reactions can accept devotional service
93. What one should do if he wants to be liberated? BG 7.28
if one actually wants to be liberated he must render service to the devotees
94. Who will lead in the path leading to the darkest region of existence? BG 7.28
one who associates with materialistic people is on the path leading to the darkest region of existence
95. What is the meaning of Aha ṁ brahmāsmi? Bg 7.29
I am spirit.
96. Who are entitled to be called Brahman? Bg 7.29
Only persons who perform activities in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness (mām āśritya) are actually entitled to be called Brahman, because
they are actually endeavoring to reach the K ṛṣṇ a planet.
97. How one become conditioned by the laws of material nature? Bg 7.30
the living entity can understand that due to forgetfulness of K ṛṣṇ a he has become conditioned by the laws of material nature.
98. What one should be fully utilized to attain the causeless mercy of the Supreme Lord? BG 7.30
one can also understand that this human form of life is an opportunity to regain K ṛṣṇ a consciousness to attain supreme lord.
99. Who does not care for the different processes? BG 7.30
he who is actually elevated in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness does not care for the different processes.
100. Who factually attains his constitutional position as an eternal servitor of Lord K ṛṣṇ a? BG 7.30
K ṛṣṇa conscious person simply directly engages himself in activities of K ṛṣṇ a consciousness and thereby factually attains his
constitutional position as an eternal servitor of Lord K ṛṣṇ a
101. How K ṛṣṇ a conscious person`s objectives will be fulﬁlled? BG 7.30
Krishna consious person takes pleasure in hearing and glorifying the Supreme Lord in pure devotional service. He is convinced
that by his doing so, all his objectives will be fulﬁlled.
102. What is called d ṛḍ ha-vrata? BG 7.30
The determined faith of Krishna consious person is called d ṛḍ ha-vrata, and it is the beginning of bhakti-yoga, or transcendental
loving service.
