Chapter 1
Observing the Armies on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra
TEXT 1
dhrtarastra uvaca
dharma-ksetre kuru-ksetresamaveta yuyutsavahmamakah pandavas caivakim akurvata sanjaya
SYNONYMSdhrtarastrah--King Dhrtarastra; uvaca--said; dharma-ksetre--in the
place of pilgrimage; kuru-ksetre--in the place named Kuruksetra;samavetah--assembled; yuyutsavah--desiring to fight; mamakah--my party(sons); pandavah--the sons of Pandu; ca--and; eva--certainly; kim--what; akurvata--did they do; sanjaya--O Sanjaya.
TRANSLATIONDhrtarastra said: O Sanjaya, after assembling in the place of
pilgrimage at Kuruksetra, what did my sons and the sons of Pandu do,being desirous to fight?
PURPORTBhagavad-gita is the widely read theistic science summarized in the
Gita-mahatmya (Glorification of the Gita). There it says that oneshould read Bhagavad-gita very scrutinizingly with the help of a personwho is a devotee of Sri Krsna and try to understand it withoutpersonally motivated interpretations. The example of clearunderstanding is there in the Bhagavad-gita itself, in the way theteaching is understood by Arjuna, who heard the Gita directly from theLord. If someone is fortunate enough to understand Bhagavad-gita inthat line of disciplic succession, without motivated interpretation,then he surpasses all studies of Vedic wisdom, and all scriptures ofthe world. One will find in the Bhagavad-gita all that is contained inother scriptures, but the reader will also find things which are not tobe found elsewhere. That is the specific standard of the Gita. It isthe perfect theistic science because it is directly spoken by theSupreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Sri Krsna.The topics discussed by Dhrtarastra and Sanjaya, as described in theMahabharata, form the basic principle for this great philosophy. It isunderstood that this philosophy evolved on the Battlefield ofKuruksetra, which is a sacred place of pilgrimage from the immemorialtime of the Vedic age. It was spoken by the Lord when He was presentpersonally on this planet for the guidance of mankind.The word dharma-ksetra (a place where religious rituals are performed)is significant because, on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra, the SupremePersonality of Godhead was present on the side of Arjuna. Dhrtarastra,the father of the Kurus, was highly doubtful about the possibility ofhis sons' ultimate victory. In his doubt, he inquired from hissecretary Sanjaya, "What did my sons and the sons of Pandu do?" He wasconfident that both his sons and the sons of his younger brother Panduwere assembled in that Field of Kuruksetra for a determined engagementof war. Still, his inquiry is significant. He did not want a compromisebetween the cousins and brothers, and he wanted to be sure of the fate
of his sons on the battlefield. Because the battle was arranged to be
fought at Kuruksetra, which is mentioned elsewhere in the Vedas as aplace of worship--even for the denizens of heaven--Dhrtarastra becamevery fearful about the influence of the holy place on the outcome ofthe battle. He knew very well that this would influence Arjuna and thesons of Pandu favorably, because by nature they were all virtuous.Sanjaya was a student of Vyasa, and therefore, by the mercy of Vyasa,Sanjaya was able to envision the Battlefield of Kuruksetra even whilehe was in the room of Dhrtarastra. And so, Dhrtarastra asked him aboutthe situation on the battlefield.Both the Pandavas and the sons of Dhrtarastra belong to the samefamily, but Dhrtarastra's mind is disclosed herein. He deliberatelyclaimed only his sons as Kurus, and he separated the sons of Pandu fromthe family heritage. One can thus understand the specific position ofDhrtarastra in his relationship with his nephews, the sons of Pandu. Asin the paddy field the unnecessary plants are taken out, so it isexpected from the very beginning of these topics that in the religiousfield of Kuruksetra where the father of religion, Sri Krsna, waspresent, the unwanted plants like Dhrtarastra's son Duryodhana andothers would be wiped out and the thoroughly religious persons, headedby Yudhisthira, would be established by the Lord. This is thesignificance of the words dharma-ksetre and kuru-ksetre, apart fromtheir historical and Vedic importance.
TEXT 2
sanjaya uvaca
drstva tu pandavanikamvyudham duryodhanas tadaacaryam upasangamyaraja vacanam abravit
SYNONYMSsanjayah--Sanjaya; uvaca--said; drstva--after seeing; tu--but; pandava-
anikam--the soldiers of the Pandavas; vyudham--arranged in militaryphalanx; duryodhanah--King Duryodhana; tada--at that time; acaryam--theteacher; upasangamya--approaching nearby; raja--the king; vacanam--words; abravit--spoke.
TRANSLATIONSanjaya said: O King, after looking over the army gathered by the sons
of Pandu, King Duryodhana went to his teacher and began to speak thefollowing words:
PURPORTDhrtarastra was blind from birth. Unfortunately, he was also bereft of
spiritual vision. He knew very well that his sons were equally blind inthe matter of religion, and he was sure that they could never reach anunderstanding with the Pandavas, who were all pious since birth. Stillhe was doubtful about the influence of the place of pilgrimage, andSanjaya could understand his motive in asking about the situation onthe battlefield. He wanted, therefore, to encourage the despondentking, and thus he warned him that his sons were not going to make anysort of compromise under the influence of the holy place. Sanjayatherefore informed the king that his son, Duryodhana, after seeing the
military force of the Pandavas, at once went to the commander in chief,
Dronacarya, to inform him of the real position. Although Duryodhana ismentioned as the king, he still had to go to the commander on accountof the seriousness of the situation. He was therefore quite fit to be apolitician. But Duryodhana's diplomatic veneer could not disguise thefear he felt when he saw the military arrangement of the Pandavas.
TEXT 3
pasyaitam pandu-putranam
acarya mahatim camumvyudham drupada-putrenatava sisyena dhimata
SYNONYMSpasya--behold; etam--this; pandu-putranam--of the sons of Pandu;
acarya--O teacher; mahatim--great; camum--military force; vyudham--arranged; drupada-putrena--by the son of Drupada; tava--your; sisyena--disciple; dhi-mata--very intelligent.
TRANSLATIONO my teacher, behold the great army of the sons of Pandu, so expertly
arranged by your intelligent disciple, the son of Drupada.
PURPORTDuryodhana, a great diplomat, wanted to point out the defects of
Dronacarya, the great brahmana commander in chief. Dronacarya had somepolitical quarrel with King Drupada, the father of Draupadi, who wasArjuna's wife. As a result of this quarrel, Drupada performed a greatsacrifice, by which he received the benediction of having a son whowould be able to kill Dronacarya. Dronacarya knew this perfectly well,and yet, as a liberal brahmana, he did not hesitate to impart all hismilitary secrets when the son of Drupada, Dhrstadyumna, was entrustedto him for military education. Now, on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra,Dhrstadyumna took the side of the Pandavas, and it was he who arrangedfor their military phalanx, after having learned the art fromDronacarya. Duryodhana pointed out this mistake of Dronacarya's so thathe might be alert and uncompromising in the fighting. By this he wantedto point out also that he should not be similarly lenient in battleagainst the Pandavas, who were also Dronacarya's affectionate students.Arjuna, especially, was his most affectionate and brilliant student.Duryodhana also warned that such leniency in the fight would lead todefeat.
TEXT 4
atra sura mahesvasa
bhimarjuna-sama yudhiyuyudhano viratas cadrupadas ca maha-rathah
SYNONYMSatra--here; surah--heroes; maha-isu-asah--mighty bowmen; bhima-arjuna--
Bhima and Arjuna; samah--equal; yudhi--in the fight; yuyudhanah--
Yuyudhana; viratah--Virata; ca--also; drupadah--Drupada; ca--also;
maha-rathah--great fighter.
TRANSLATIONHere in this army there are many heroic bowmen equal in fighting to
Bhima and Arjuna; there are also great fighters like Yuyudhana, Virataand Drupada.
PURPORTEven though Dhrstadyumna was not a very important obstacle in the face
of Dronacarya's very great power in the military art, there were manyothers who were the cause of fear. They are mentioned by Duryodhana asgreat stumbling blocks on the path of victory because each and everyone of them was as formidable as Bhima and Arjuna. He knew the strengthof Bhima and Arjuna, and thus he compared the others with them.
TEXT 5
dhrstaketus cekitanah
kasirajas ca viryavanpurujit kuntibhojas casaibyas ca nara-pungavah
SYNONYMSdhrstaketuh--Dhrstaketu; cekitanah--Cekitana; kasirajah--Kasiraja; ca--
also; virya-van--very powerful; purujit--Purujit; kuntibhojah--Kuntibhoja; ca--and; saibyah--Saibya; ca--and; nara-pungavah--heroes inhuman society.
TRANSLATIONThere are also great, heroic, powerful fighters like Dhrstaketu,
Cekitana, Kasiraja, Purujit, Kuntibhoja and Saibya.
TEXT 6
yudhamanyus ca vikranta
uttamaujas ca viryavansaubhadro draupadeyas casarva eva maha-rathah
SYNONYMSyudhamanyuh--Yudhamanyu; ca--and; vikrantah--mighty; uttamaujah--
Uttamauja; ca--and; virya-van--very powerful; saubhadrah--the son ofSubhadra; draupadeyah--the sons of Draupadi; ca--and; sarve--all; eva--certainly; maha-rathah--great chariot fighters.
TRANSLATION
There are the mighty Yudhamanyu, the very powerful Uttamauja, the son
of Subhadra and the sons of Draupadi. All these warriors are greatchariot fighters.
TEXT 7
asmakam tu visista ye
tan nibodha dvijottamanayaka mama sainyasyasamjnartham tan bravimi te
SYNONYMSasmakam--our; tu--but; visistah--especially powerful; ye--those; tan--
them; nibodha--just take note, be informed; dvija-uttama--the best ofthe brahmanas; nayakah--captains; mama--my; sainyasya--of the soldiers;samjna-artham--for information; tan--them; bravimi--I am speaking; te--your.
TRANSLATIONO best of the brahmanas, for your information, let me tell you about
the captains who are especially qualified to lead my military force.
TEXT 8
bhavan bhismas ca karnas ca
krpas ca samitim-jayahasvatthama vikarnas casaumadattis tathaiva ca
SYNONYMSbhavan--your self; bhismah--Grandfather Bhisma; ca--also; karnah--
Karna; ca--and; krpah--Krpa; ca--and; samitim-jayah--always victoriousin battle; asvatthama--Asvatthama; vikarnah--Vikarna; ca--as well as;saumadattih--the son of Somadatta; tatha--and as; eva--certainly; ca--and.
TRANSLATIONThere are personalities like yourself, Bhisma, Karna, Krpa, Asvatthama,
Vikarna and the son of Somadatta called Bhurisrava, who are alwaysvictorious in battle.
PURPORTDuryodhana mentions the exceptional heroes in the battle, all of whom
are ever victorious. Vikarna is the brother of Duryodhana, Asvatthamais the son of Dronacarya, and Saumadatti, or Bhurisrava, is the son ofthe King of the Bahlikas. Karna is the half brother of Arjuna, as hewas born of Kunti before her marriage with King Pandu. Krpacarya's twinsister married Dronacarya.
TEXT 9
anye ca bahavah sura
mad-arthe tyakta-jivitahnana-sastra-praharanahsarve yuddha-visaradah
SYNONYMS
anye--many others; ca--also; bahavah--in great numbers; surah--heroes;
mat-arthe--for my sake; tyakta-jivitah--prepared to risk life; nana--many; sastra--weapons; praharanah--equipped with; sarve--all of them;yuddha--battle; visaradah--experienced in military science.
TRANSLATIONThere are many other heroes who are prepared to lay down their lives
for my sake. All of them are well equipped with different kinds ofweapons, and all are experienced in military science.
PURPORTAs far as the others are concerned--like Jayadratha, Krtavarma, Salya,
etc.--all are determined to lay down their lives for Duryodhana's sake.In other words, it is already concluded that all of them would die inthe Battle of Kuruksetra for joining the party of the sinfulDuryodhana. Duryodhana was, of course, confident of his victory onaccount of the above-mentioned combined strength of his friends.
TEXT 10
aparyaptam tad asmakam
balam bhismabhiraksitamparyaptam tv idam etesambalam bhimabhiraksitam
SYNONYMSaparyaptam--immeasurable; tat--that; asmakam--of ours; balam--strength;
bhisma--by Grandfather Bhisma; abhiraksitam--perfectly protected;paryaptam--limited; tu--but; idam--all this; etesam--of the Pandavas;balam--strength; bhima--by Bhima; abhiraksitam--carefully protected.
TRANSLATIONOur strength is immeasurable, and we are perfectly protected by
Grandfather Bhisma, whereas the strength of the Pandavas, carefullyprotected by Bhima, is limited.
PURPORTHerein an estimation of comparative strength is made by Duryodhana. He
thinks that the strength of his armed forces is immeasurable, beingspecifically protected by the most experienced general, GrandfatherBhisma. On the other hand, the forces of the Pandavas are limited,being protected by a less experienced general, Bhima, who is like a figin the presence of Bhisma. Duryodhana was always envious of Bhimabecause he knew perfectly well that if he should die at all, he wouldonly be killed by Bhima. But at the same time, he was confident of hisvictory on account of the presence of Bhisma, who was a far superiorgeneral. His conclusion that he would come out of the battle victoriouswas well ascertained.
TEXT 11
ayanesu ca sarvesu
yatha-bhagam avasthitah
bhismam evabhiraksantubhavantah sarva eva hi
SYNONYMSayanesu--in the strategic points; ca--also; sarvesu--everywhere; yatha-
bhagam--as they are differently arranged; avasthitah--situated;bhismam--unto Grandfather Bhisma; eva--certainly; abhiraksantu--supportmay be given; bhavantah--all of you; sarve--respectively; eva--certainly; hi--and exactly.
TRANSLATIONNow all of you must give full support to Grandfather Bhisma, standing
at your respective strategic points in the phalanx of the army.
PURPORTDuryodhana, after praising the prowess of Bhisma, further considered
that others might think that they had been considered less important,so in his usual diplomatic way, he tried to adjust the situation in theabove words. He emphasized that Bhismadeva was undoubtedly the greatesthero, but he was an old man, so everyone must especially think of hisprotection from all sides. He might become engaged in the fight, andthe enemy might take advantage of his full engagement on one side.Therefore, it was important that other heroes would not leave theirstrategic positions and allow the enemy to break the phalanx.Duryodhana clearly felt that the victory of the Kurus depended on thepresence of Bhismadeva. He was confident of the full support ofBhismadeva and Dronacarya in the battle because he well knew that theydid not even speak a word when Arjuna's wife Draupadi, in her helplesscondition, had appealed to them for justice while she was being forcedto appear naked in the presence of all the great generals in theassembly. Although he knew that the two generals had some sort ofaffection for the Pandavas, he hoped that all such affection would nowbe completely given up by them, as was customary during the gamblingperformances.
TEXT 12
tasya sanjanayan harsam
kuru-vrddhah pitamahahsimha-nadam vinadyoccaihsankham dadhmau pratapavan
SYNONYMStasya--his; sanjanayan--increasing; harsam--cheerfulness; kuru-vrddhah-
-the grandsire of the Kuru dynasty (Bhisma); pitamahah--thegrandfather; simha-nadam--roaring sound, like a lion; vinadya--vibrating; uccaih--very loudly; sankham--conchshell; dadhmau--blew;pratapa-van--the valiant.
TRANSLATION
Then Bhisma, the great valiant grandsire of the Kuru dynasty, the
grandfather of the fighters, blew his conchshell very loudly, like thesound of a lion, giving Duryodhana joy.
PURPORTThe grandsire of the Kuru dynasty could understand the inner meaning of
the heart of his grandson Duryodhana, and out of his natural compassionfor him he tried to cheer him by blowing his conchshell very loudly,befitting his position as a lion. Indirectly, by the symbolism of theconchshell, he informed his depressed grandson Duryodhana that he hadno chance of victory in the battle, because the Supreme Lord Krsna wason the other side. But still, it was his duty to conduct the fight, andno pains would be spared in that connection.
TEXT 13
tatah sankhas ca bheryas ca
panavanaka-gomukhahsahasaivabhyahanyantasa sabdas tumulo 'bhavat
SYNONYMStatah--thereafter; sankhah--conchshells; ca--also; bheryah--bugles; ca-
-and; panava-anaka--trumpets and drums; go-mukhah--horns; sahasa--allof a sudden; eva--certainly; abhyahanyanta--being simultaneouslysounded; sah--that; sabdah--combined sound; tumulah--tumultuous;abhavat--became.
TRANSLATIONAfter that, the conchshells, bugles, trumpets, drums and horns were all
suddenly sounded, and the combined sound was tumultuous.
TEXT 14
tatah svetair hayair yukte
mahati syandane sthitaumadhavah pandavas caivadivyau sankhau pradadhmatuh
SYNONYMStatah--thereafter; svetaih--by white; hayaih--horses; yukte--being
yoked; mahati--in a great; syandane--chariot; sthitau--so situated;madhavah--Krsna (the husband of the goddess of fortune); pandavah--Arjuna (the son of Pandu); ca--also; eva--certainly; divyau--transcendental; sankhau--conchshells; pradadhmatuh--sounded.
TRANSLATIONOn the other side, both Lord Krsna and Arjuna, stationed on a great
chariot drawn by white horses, sounded their transcendentalconchshells.
PURPORT
In contrast with the conchshell blown by Bhismadeva, the conchshells in
the hands of Krsna and Arjuna are described as transcendental. Thesounding of the transcendental conchshells indicated that there was nohope of victory for the other side because Krsna was on the side of thePandavas. Jayas tu pandu-putranam yesam pakse janardanah. Victory isalways with persons like the sons of Pandu because Lord Krsna isassociated with them. And whenever and wherever the Lord is present,the goddess of fortune is also there because the goddess of fortunenever lives alone without her husband. Therefore, victory and fortunewere awaiting Arjuna, as indicated by the transcendental sound producedby the conchshell of Visnu, or Lord Krsna. Besides that, the chariot onwhich both the friends were seated was donated by Agni (the fire-god)to Arjuna, and this indicated that this chariot was capable ofconquering all sides, wherever it was drawn over the three worlds.
TEXT 15
pancajanyam hrsikeso
devadattam dhananjayahpaundram dadhmau maha-sankhambhima-karma vrkodarah
SYNONYMSpancajanyam--the conchshell named Pancajanya; hrsika-isah--Hrsikesa
(Krsna, the Lord who directs the senses of the devotees); devadattam--the conchshell named Devadatta; dhanam-jayah--Dhananjaya (Arjuna, thewinner of wealth); paundram--the conch named Paundra; dadhmau--blew;maha-sankham--the terrific conchshell; bhima-karma--one who performsherculean tasks; vrka-udarah--the voracious eater (Bhima).
TRANSLATIONThen, Lord Krsna blew His conchshell, called Pancajanya; Arjuna blew
his, the Devadatta; and Bhima, the voracious eater and performer ofherculean tasks, blew his terrific conchshell called Paundra.
PURPORTLord Krsna is referred to as Hrsikesa in this verse because He is the
owner of all senses. The living entities are part and parcel of Him,and, therefore the senses of the living entities are also part andparcel of His senses. The impersonalists cannot account for the sensesof the living entities, and therefore they are always anxious todescribe all living entities as sense-less, or impersonal. The Lord,situated in the hearts of all living entities, directs their senses.But, He directs in terms of the surrender of the living entity, and inthe case of a pure devotee He directly controls the senses. Here on theBattlefield of Kuruksetra the Lord directly controls the transcendentalsenses of Arjuna, and thus His particular name of Hrsikesa. The Lordhas different names according to His different activities. For example,His name is Madhusudana because He killed the demon of the name Madhu;His name is Govinda because He gives pleasure to the cows and to thesenses; His name is Vasudeva because He appeared as the son ofVasudeva; His name is Devaki-nandana because He accepted Devaki as Hismother; His name is Yasoda-nandana because He awarded His childhoodpastimes to Yasoda at Vrndavana; His name is Partha-sarathi because Heworked as charioteer of His friend Arjuna. Similarly, His name is
Hrsikesa because He gave direction to Arjuna on the Battlefield of
Kuruksetra.Arjuna is referred to as Dhananjaya in this verse because he helped hiselder brother in fetching wealth when it was required by the king tomake expenditures for different sacrifices. Similarly, Bhima is knownas Vrkodara because he could eat as voraciously as he could performherculean tasks, such as killing the demon Hidimba. So, the particulartypes of conchshell blown by the different personalities on the side ofthe Pandavas, beginning with the Lord's, were all very encouraging tothe fighting soldiers. On the other side there were no such credits,nor the presence of Lord Krsna, the supreme director, nor that of thegoddess of fortune. So, they were predestined to lose the battle--andthat was the message announced by the sounds of the conchshells.
TEXTS 16-18
anantavijayam raja
kunti-putro yudhisthirahnakulah sahadevas casughosa-manipuspakau
kasyas ca paramesv-asah
sikhandi ca maha-rathahdhrstadyumno viratas casatyakis caparajitah
drupado draupadeyas ca
sarvasah prthivi-patesaubhadras ca maha-bahuhsankhan dadhmuh prthak prthak
SYNONYMSananta-vijayam--the conch named Ananta-vijaya; raja--the king; kunti-
putrah--the son of Kunti; yudhisthirah--Yudhisthira; nakulah--Nakula;sahadevah--Sahadeva; ca--and; sughosa-manipuspakau--the conches namedSughosa and Manipuspaka; kasyah--the King of Kasi (Varanasi); ca--and;parama-isu-asah--the great archer; sikhandi--Sikhandi; ca--also; maha-rathah--one who can fight alone against thousands; dhrstadyumnah--Dhrstadyumna (the son of King Drupada); viratah--Virata (the prince whogave shelter to the Pandavas while they were in disguise); ca--also;satyakih--Satyaki (the same as Yuyudhana, the charioteer of LordKrsna); ca--and; aparajitah--who were never vanquished before;drupadah--Drupada, the King of Pancala; draupadeyah--the sons ofDraupadi; ca--also; sarvasah--all; prthivi-pate--O King; saubhadrah--the son of Subhadra (Abhimanyu); ca--also; maha-bahuh--mighty-armed;sankhan--conchshells; dadhmuh--blew; prthak prthak--each separately.
TRANSLATIONKing Yudhisthira, the son of Kunti, blew his conchshell, the Ananta-
vijaya, and Nakula and Sahadeva blew the Sughosa and Manipuspaka. Thatgreat archer the King of Kasi, the great fighter Sikhandi,Dhrstadyumna, Virata and the unconquerable Satyaki, Drupada, the sonsof Draupadi, and the others, O King, such as the mighty-armed son ofSubhadra, all blew their respective conchshells.
PURPORT
Sanjaya informed King Dhrtarastra very tactfully that his unwise policy
of deceiving the sons of Pandu and endeavoring to enthrone his own sonson the seat of the kingdom was not very laudable. The signs alreadyclearly indicated that the whole Kuru dynasty would be killed in thatgreat battle. Beginning with the grandsire, Bhisma, down to thegrandsons like Abhimanyu and others--including kings from many statesof the world--all were present there, and all were doomed. The wholecatastrophe was due to King Dhrtarastra, because he encouraged thepolicy followed by his sons.
TEXT 19
sa ghoso dhartarastranam
hrdayani vyadarayatnabhas ca prthivim caivatumulo 'bhyanunadayan
SYNONYMSsah--that; ghosah--vibration; dhartarastranam--of the sons of
Dhrtarastra; hrdayani--hearts; vyadarayat--shattered; nabhah--the sky;ca--also; prthivim--the surface of the earth; ca--also; eva--certainly;tumulah--uproarious; abhyanunadayan--by resounding.
TRANSLATIONThe blowing of these different conchshells became uproarious, and thus,
vibrating both in the sky and on the earth, it shattered the hearts ofthe sons of Dhrtarastra.
PURPORTWhen Bhisma and the others on the side of Duryodhana blew their
respective conchshells, there was no heart-breaking on the part of thePandavas. Such occurrences are not mentioned, but in this particularverse it is mentioned that the hearts of the sons of Dhrtarastra wereshattered by the sounds vibrated by the Pandavas' party. This is due tothe Pandavas and their confidence in Lord Krsna. One who takes shelterof the Supreme Lord has nothing to fear, even in the midst of thegreatest calamity.
TEXT 20
atha vyavasthitan drstva
dhartarastran kapi-dhvajahpravrtte sastra-sampatedhanur udyamya pandavahhrsikesam tada vakyamidam aha mahi-pate
SYNONYMSatha--thereupon; vyavasthitan--situated; drstva--looking upon;
dhartarastran--the sons of Dhrtarastra; kapi-dhvajah--one whose flag ismarked with Hanuman; pravrtte--while about to engage; sastra-sampate--the arrows released; dhanuh--bow; udyamya--after taking up; pandavah--
the son of Pandu (Arjuna); hrsikesam--unto Lord Krsna; tada--at that
time; vakyam--words; idam--these; aha--said; mahi-pate--O King.
TRANSLATIONO King, at that time Arjuna, the son of Pandu, who was seated in his
chariot, bearing the flag marked with Hanuman, took up his bow andprepared to shoot his arrows, looking at the sons of Dhrtarastra. OKing, Arjuna then spoke to Hrsikesa [Krsna] these words:
PURPORTThe battle was just about to begin. It is understood from the above
statement that the sons of Dhrtarastra were more or less disheartenedby the unexpected arrangement of military force by the Pandavas, whowere guided by the direct instructions of Lord Krsna on thebattlefield. The emblem of Hanuman on the flag of Arjuna is anothersign of victory because Hanuman cooperated with Lord Rama in the battlebetween Rama and Ravana, and Lord Rama emerged victorious. Now bothRama and Hanuman were present on the chariot of Arjuna to help him.Lord Krsna is Rama Himself, and wherever Lord Rama is, His eternalservitor Hanuman and His eternal consort Sita, the goddess of fortune,are present. Therefore, Arjuna had no cause to fear any enemieswhatsoever. And above all, the Lord of the senses, Lord Krsna, waspersonally present to give him direction. Thus, all good counsel wasavailable to Arjuna in the matter of executing the battle. In suchauspicious conditions, arranged by the Lord for His eternal devotee,lay the signs of assured victory.
TEXTS 21-22
arjuna uvaca
senayor ubhayor madhyeratham sthapaya me 'cyutayavad etan nirikse 'hamyoddhu-kaman avasthitan
kair maya saha yoddhavyam
asmin rana-samudyame
SYNONYMSarjunah--Arjuna; uvaca--said; senayoh--of the armies; ubhayoh--of both
the parties; madhye--in between them; ratham--the chariot; sthapaya--please keep; me--my; acyuta--O infallible one; yavat--as long as; etan--all these; nirikse--may look; aham--I; yoddhu-kaman--desiring tofight; avasthitan--arrayed on the battlefield; kaih--with whom; maya--by me; saha--with; yoddhavyam--to fight with; asmin--in this; rana--strife; samudyame--in the attempt.
TRANSLATIONArjuna said: O infallible one, please draw my chariot between the two
armies so that I may see who is present here, who is desirous offighting, and with whom I must contend in this great battle attempt.
PURPORT
Although Lord Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, out of His
causeless mercy He was engaged in the service of His friend. He neverfails in His affection for His devotees, and thus He is addressedherein as infallible. As charioteer, He had to carry out the orders ofArjuna, and since He did not hesitate to do so, He is addressed asinfallible. Although He had accepted the position of a charioteer forHis devotee, His supreme position was not challenged. In allcircumstances, He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hrsikesa, theLord of the total senses. The relationship between the Lord and Hisservitor is very sweet and transcendental. The servitor is always readyto render service to the Lord, and, similarly, the Lord is alwaysseeking an opportunity to render some service to the devotee. He takesgreater pleasure in His pure devotee's assuming the advantageousposition of ordering Him than He does in being the giver of orders. Asmaster, everyone is under His orders, and no one is above Him to orderHim. But when He finds that a pure devotee is ordering Him, He obtainstranscendental pleasure, although He is the infallible master of allcircumstances.As a pure devotee of the Lord, Arjuna had no desire to fight with hiscousins and brothers, but he was forced to come onto the battlefield bythe obstinacy of Duryodhana, who was never agreeable to any peacefulnegotiation. Therefore, he was very anxious to see who the leadingpersons present on the battlefield were. Although there was no questionof a peacemaking endeavor on the battlefield, he wanted to see themagain and to see how much they were bent upon demanding an unwantedwar.
TEXT 23
yotsyamanan avekse 'ham
ya ete 'tra samagatahdhartarastrasya durbuddheryuddhe priya-cikirsavah
SYNONYMSyotsyamanan--those who will be fighting; avekse--let me see; aham--I;
ye--who; ete--those; atra--here; samagatah--assembled; dhartarastrasya--the son of Dhrtarastra; durbuddheh--evil-minded; yuddhe--in the fight;priya--well; cikirsavah--wishing.
TRANSLATIONLet me see those who have come here to fight, wishing to please the
evil-minded son of Dhrtarastra.
PURPORTIt was an open secret that Duryodhana wanted to usurp the kingdom of
the Pandavas by evil plans, in collaboration with his father,Dhrtarastra. Therefore, all persons who had joined the side ofDuryodhana must have been birds of the same feather. Arjuna wanted tosee them in the battlefield before the fight was begun, just to learnwho they were, but he had no intention of proposing peace negotiationswith them. It was also a fact that he wanted to see them to make anestimate of the strength which he had to face, although he was quiteconfident of victory because Krsna was sitting by his side.
TEXT 24
sanjaya uvaca
evam ukto hrsikesogudakesena bharatasenayor ubhayor madhyesthapayitva rathottamam
SYNONYMSsanjayah--Sanjaya; uvaca--said; evam--thus; uktah--addressed;
hrsikesah--Lord Krsna; gudakesena--by Arjuna; bharata--O descendant ofBharata; senayoh--of armies; ubhayoh--of both; madhye--in the midst of;sthapayitva--by placing; ratha-uttamam--the finest chariot.
TRANSLATIONSanjaya said: O descendant of Bharata, being thus addressed by Arjuna,
Lord Krsna drew up the fine chariot in the midst of the armies of bothparties.
PURPORTIn this verse Arjuna is referred to as Gudakesa. Gudaka means sleep,
and one who conquers sleep is called gudakesa. Sleep also meansignorance. So Arjuna conquered both sleep and ignorance because of hisfriendship with Krsna. As a great devotee of Krsna, he could not forgetKrsna even for a moment, because that is the nature of a devotee.Either in waking or in sleep, a devotee of the Lord can never be freefrom thinking of Krsna's name, form, qualities and pastimes. Thus adevotee of Krsna can conquer both sleep and ignorance simply bythinking of Krsna constantly. This is called Krsna consciousness, orsamadhi. As Hrsikesa, or the director of the senses and mind of everyliving entity, Krsna could understand Arjuna's purpose in placing thechariot in the midst of the armies. Thus He did so, and spoke asfollows.
TEXT 25
bhisma-drona-pramukhatah
sarvesam ca mahi-ksitamuvaca partha pasyaitansamavetan kurun iti
SYNONYMSbhisma--Grandfather Bhisma; drona--the teacher Drona; pramukhatah--in
front of; sarvesam--all; ca--also; mahi-ksitam--chiefs of the world;uvaca--said; partha--O Partha (son of Prtha); pasya--just behold; etan--all of them; samavetan--assembled; kurun--all the members of the Kurudynasty; iti--thus.
TRANSLATIONIn the presence of Bhisma, Drona and all other chieftains of the world,
Hrsikesa, the Lord, said, Just behold, Partha, all the Kurus who areassembled here.
PURPORT
As the Supersoul of all living entities, Lord Krsna could understand
what was going on in the mind of Arjuna. The use of the word Hrsikesain this connection indicates that He knew everything. And the wordPartha, or the son of Kunti or Prtha, is also similarly significant inreference to Arjuna. As a friend, He wanted to inform Arjuna thatbecause Arjuna was the son of Prtha, the sister of His own fatherVasudeva, He had agreed to be the charioteer of Arjuna. Now what didKrsna mean when He told Arjuna to "behold the Kurus"? Did Arjuna wantto stop there and not fight? Krsna never expected such things from theson of His aunt Prtha. The mind of Arjuna was thus predicted by theLord in friendly joking.
TEXT 26
tatrapasyat sthitan parthah
pitrn atha pitamahanacaryan matulan bhratrnputran pautran sakhims tathasvasuran suhrdas caivasenayor ubhayor api
SYNONYMStatra--there; apasyat--he could see; sthitan--standing; parthah--
Arjuna; pitrn--fathers; atha--also; pitamahan--grandfathers; acaryan--teachers; matulan--maternal uncles; bhratrn--brothers; putran--sons;pautran--grandsons; sakhin--friends; tatha--too; svasuran--fathers-in-law; suhrdah--well-wishers; ca--also; eva--certainly; senayoh--of thearmies; ubhayoh--of both parties; api--including.
TRANSLATIONThere Arjuna could see, within the midst of the armies of both parties,
his fathers, grandfathers, teachers, maternal uncles, brothers, sons,grandsons, friends, and also his father-in-law and well-wishers--allpresent there.
PURPORTOn the battlefield Arjuna could see all kinds of relatives. He could
see persons like Bhurisrava, who were his father's contemporaries,grandfathers Bhisma and Somadatta, teachers like Dronacarya andKrpacarya, maternal uncles like Salya and Sakuni, brothers likeDuryodhana, sons like Laksmana, friends like Asvatthama, well-wisherslike Krtavarma, etc. He could see also the armies which contained manyof his friends.
TEXT 27
tan samiksya sa kaunteyah
sarvan bandhun avasthitankrpaya parayavistovisidann idam abravit
SYNONYMS
tan--all of them; samiksya--after seeing; sah--he; kaunteyah--the son
of Kunti; sarvan--all kinds of; bandhun--relatives; avasthitan--situated; krpaya--by compassion; paraya--of a high grade; avistah--overwhelmed by; visidan--while lamenting; idam--thus; abravit--spoke.
TRANSLATIONWhen the son of Kunti, Arjuna, saw all these different grades of
friends and relatives, he became overwhelmed with compassion and spokethus:
TEXT 28
arjuna uvaca
drstvemam sva-janam krsnayuyutsum samupasthitamsidanti mama gatranimukham ca parisusyati
SYNONYMSarjunah--Arjuna; uvaca--said; drstva--after seeing; imam--all these;
sva-janam--kinsmen; krsna--O Krsna; yuyutsum--all in fighting spirit;samupasthitam--all present; sidanti--quivering; mama--my; gatrani--limbs of the body; mukham--mouth; ca--also; parisusyati--drying up.
TRANSLATIONArjuna said: My dear Krsna, seeing my friends and relatives present
before me in such a fighting spirit, I feel the limbs of my bodyquivering and my mouth drying up.
PURPORTAny man who has genuine devotion to the Lord has all the good qualities
which are found in godly persons or in the demigods, whereas thenondevotee, however advanced he may be in material qualifications byeducation and culture, lacks in godly qualities. As such, Arjuna, justafter seeing his kinsmen, friends and relatives on the battlefield, wasat once overwhelmed by compassion for them who had so decided to fightamongst themselves. As far as his soldiers were concerned, he wassympathetic from the beginning, but he felt compassion even for thesoldiers of the opposite party, foreseeing their imminent death. And sothinking, the limbs of his body began to quiver, and his mouth becamedry. He was more or less astonished to see their fighting spirit.Practically the whole community, all blood relatives of Arjuna, hadcome to fight with him. This overwhelmed a kind devotee like Arjuna.Although it is not mentioned here, still one can easily imagine thatnot only were Arjuna's bodily limbs quivering and his mouth drying up,but that he was also crying out of compassion. Such symptoms in Arjunawere not due to weakness but to his softheartedness, a characteristicof a pure devotee of the Lord. It is said therefore:
yasyasti bhaktir bhagavaty akincana
sarvair gunais tatra samasate surahharav abhaktasya kuto mahad-gunamano-rathenasati dhavato bahih
"One who has unflinching devotion for the Personality of Godhead has
all the good qualities of the demigods. But one who is not a devotee ofthe Lord has only material qualifications that are of little value.This is because he is hovering on the mental plane and is certain to beattracted by the glaring material energy." (Bhag. 5.18.12)
TEXT 29
vepathus ca sarire me
roma-harsas ca jayategandivam sramsate hastattvak caiva paridahyate
SYNONYMSvepathuh--trembling of the body; ca--also; sarire--on the body; me--my;
roma-harsah--standing of the hair on end; ca--also; jayate--is takingplace; gandivam--the bow of Arjuna; sramsate--is slipping; hastat--fromthe hands; tvak--skin; ca--also; eva--certainly; paridahyate--burning.
TRANSLATIONMy whole body is trembling, and my hair is standing on end. My bow
Gandiva is slipping from my hand, and my skin is burning.
PURPORTThere are two kinds of trembling of the body, and two kinds of
standings of the hair on end. Such phenomena occur either in greatspiritual ecstasy or out of great fear under material conditions. Thereis no fear in transcendental realization. Arjuna's symptoms in thissituation are out of material fear--namely, loss of life. This isevident from other symptoms also; he became so impatient that hisfamous bow Gandiva was slipping from his hands, and, because his heartwas burning within him, he was feeling a burning sensation of the skin.All these are due to a material conception of life.
TEXT 30
na ca saknomy avasthatum
bhramativa ca me manahnimittani ca pasyamiviparitani kesava
SYNONYMSna--nor; ca--also; saknomi--am I able; avasthatum--to stay; bhramati--
forgetting; iva--as; ca--and; me--my; manah--mind; nimittani--causes;ca--also; pasyami--I foresee; viparitani--just the opposite; kesava--Okiller of the demon Kesi (Krsna).
TRANSLATIONI am now unable to stand here any longer. I am forgetting myself, and
my mind is reeling. I foresee only evil, O killer of the Kesi demon.
PURPORT
Due to his impatience, Arjuna was unable to stay on the battlefield,
and he was forgetting himself on account of the weakness of his mind.Excessive attachment for material things puts a man in a bewilderingcondition of existence. Bhayam dvitiyabhinivesatah syat (Bhag.11.2.37): such fearfulness and loss of mental equilibrium take place inpersons who are too affected by material conditions. Arjuna envisionedonly unhappiness in the battlefield--he would not be happy even bygaining victory over the foe. The word nimitta is significant. When aman sees only frustration in his expectations, he thinks, "Why am Ihere?" Everyone is interested in himself and his own welfare. No one isinterested in the Supreme Self. Arjuna is supposed to show disregardfor self-interest by submission to the will of Krsna, who is everyone'sreal self-interest. The conditioned soul forgets this, and thereforesuffers material pains. Arjuna thought that his victory in the battlewould only be a cause of lamentation for him.
TEXT 31
na ca sreyo 'nupasyami
hatva sva-janam ahavena kankse vijayam krsnana ca rajyam sukhani ca
SYNONYMSna--nor; ca--also; sreyah--good; anupasyami--do I foresee; hatva--by
killing; sva-janam--own kinsmen; ahave--in the fight; na--nor; kankse--do I desire; vijayam--victory; krsna--O Krsna; na--nor; ca--also;rajyam--kingdom; sukhani--happiness thereof; ca--also.
TRANSLATIONI do not see how any good can come from killing my own kinsmen in this
battle, nor can I, my dear Krsna, desire any subsequent victory,kingdom, or happiness.
PURPORTWithout knowing that one's self-interest is in Visnu (or Krsna),
conditioned souls are attracted by bodily relationships, hoping to behappy in such situations. Under delusion, they forget that Krsna isalso the cause of material happiness. Arjuna appears to have evenforgotten the moral codes for a ksatriya. It is said that two kinds ofmen, namely the ksatriya who dies directly in front of the battlefieldunder Krsna's personal orders and the person in the renounced order oflife who is absolutely devoted to spiritual culture, are eligible toenter into the sun globe, which is so powerful and dazzling. Arjuna isreluctant even to kill his enemies, let alone his relatives. He thoughtthat by killing his kinsmen there would be no happiness in his life,and therefore he was not willing to fight, just as a person who doesnot feel hunger is not inclined to cook. He has now decided to go intothe forest and live a secluded life in frustration. But as a ksatriya,he requires a kingdom for his subsistence, because the ksatriyas cannotengage themselves in any other occupation. But Arjuna has no kingdom.Arjuna's sole opportunity for gaining a kingdom lay in fighting withhis cousins and brothers and reclaiming the kingdom inherited from hisfather, which he does not like to do. Therefore he considers himselffit to go to the forest to live a secluded life of frustration.
TEXTS 32-35
kim no rajyena govinda
kim bhogair jivitena vayesam arthe kanksitam norajyam bhogah sukhani ca
ta ime 'vasthita yuddhe
pranams tyaktva dhanani caacaryah pitarah putrastathaiva ca pitamahah
matulah svasurah pautrah
syalah sambandhinas tathaetan na hantum icchamighnato 'pi madhusudana
api trailokya-rajyasya
hetoh kim nu mahi-krtenihatya dhartarastran nahka pritih syaj janardana
SYNONYMSkim--what use; nah--to us; rajyena--is the kingdom; govinda--O Krsna;
kim--what; bhogaih--enjoyment; jivitena--by living; va--either; yesam--for whom; arthe--for the matter of; kanksitam--desired; nah--our;rajyam--kingdom; bhogah--material enjoyment; sukhani--all happiness;ca--also; te--all of them; ime--these; avasthitah--situated; yuddhe--inthis battlefield; pranan--lives; tyaktva--giving up; dhanani--riches;ca--also; acaryah--teachers; pitarah--fathers; putrah--sons; tatha--aswell as; eva--certainly; ca--also; pitamahah--grandfathers; matulah--maternal uncles; svasurah--fathers-in-law; pautrah--grandsons; syalah--brothers-in-law; sambandhinah--relatives; tatha--as well as; etan--allthese; na--never; hantum--for killing; icchami--do I wish; ghnatah--being killed; api--even; madhusudana--O killer of the demon Madhu(Krsna); api--even if; trai-lokya--of the three worlds; rajyasya--ofthe kingdoms; hetoh--in exchange; kim--what to speak of; nu--only;mahi-krte--for the sake of the earth; nihatya--by killing;dhartarastran--the sons of Dhrtarastra; nah--our; ka--what; pritih--pleasure; syat--will there be; janardana--O maintainer of all livingentities.
TRANSLATIONO Govinda, of what avail to us are kingdoms, happiness or even life
itself when all those for whom we may desire them are now arrayed inthis battlefield? O Madhusudana, when teachers, fathers, sons,grandfathers, maternal uncles, fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law and all relatives are ready to give up their lives and propertiesand are standing before me, then why should I wish to kill them, thoughI may survive? O maintainer of all creatures, I am not prepared tofight with them even in exchange for the three worlds, let alone thisearth.
PURPORT
Arjuna has addressed Lord Krsna as Govinda because Krsna is the object
of all pleasures for cows and the senses. By using this significantword, Arjuna indicates what will satisfy his senses. Although Govindais not meant for satisfying our senses, if we try to satisfy the sensesof Govinda then automatically our own senses are satisfied. Materially,everyone wants to satisfy his senses, and he wants God to be the ordersupplier for such satisfaction. The Lord will satisfy the senses of theliving entities as much as they deserve, but not to the extent thatthey may covet. But when one takes the opposite way--namely, when onetries to satisfy the senses of Govinda without desiring to satisfyone's own senses--then by the grace of Govinda all desires of theliving entity are satisfied. Arjuna's deep affection for community andfamily members is exhibited here partly due to his natural compassionfor them. He is therefore not prepared to fight. Everyone wants to showhis opulence to friends and relatives, but Arjuna fears that all hisrelatives and friends will be killed in the battlefield, and he will beunable to share his opulence after victory. This is a typicalcalculation of material life. The transcendental life is, however,different. Since a devotee wants to satisfy the desires of the Lord, hecan, Lord willing, accept all kinds of opulence for the service of theLord, and if the Lord is not willing, he should not accept a farthing.Arjuna did not want to kill his relatives, and if there were any needto kill them, he desired that Krsna kill them personally. At this pointhe did not know that Krsna had already killed them before their cominginto the battlefield and that he was only to become an instrument forKrsna. This fact is disclosed in the following chapters. As a naturaldevotee of the Lord, Arjuna did not like to retaliate against hismiscreant cousins and brothers, but it was the Lord's plan that theyshould all be killed. The devotee of the Lord does not retaliateagainst the wrongdoer, but the Lord does not tolerate any mischief doneto the devotee by the miscreants. The Lord can excuse a person on Hisown account, but He excuses no one who has done harm to His devotees.Therefore the Lord was determined to kill the miscreants, althoughArjuna wanted to excuse them.
TEXT 36
papam evasrayed asman
hatvaitan atatayinahtasman narha vayam hantumdhartarastran sa-bandhavansva-janam hi katham hatvasukhinah syama madhava
SYNONYMSpapam--vices; eva--certainly; asrayet--must take upon; asman--us;
hatva--by killing; etan--all these; atatayinah--aggressors; tasmat--therefore; na--never; arhah--deserving; vayam--we; hantum--to kill;dhartarastran--the sons of Dhrtarastra; sa-bandhavan--along withfriends; sva-janam--kinsmen; hi--certainly; katham--how; hatva--bykilling; sukhinah--happy; syama--become; madhava--O Krsna, husband ofthe goddess of fortune.
TRANSLATIONSin will overcome us if we slay such aggressors. Therefore it is not
proper for us to kill the sons of Dhrtarastra and our friends. What
should we gain, O Krsna, husband of the goddess of fortune, and how
could we be happy by killing our own kinsmen?
PURPORTAccording to Vedic injunctions there are six kinds of aggressors: 1) a
poison giver, 2) one who sets fire to the house, 3) one who attackswith deadly weapons, 4) one who plunders riches, 5) one who occupiesanother's land, and 6) one who kidnaps a wife. Such aggressors are atonce to be killed, and no sin is incurred by killing such aggressors.Such killing of aggressors is quite befitting any ordinary man, butArjuna was not an ordinary person. He was saintly by character, andtherefore he wanted to deal with them in saintliness. This kind ofsaintliness, however, is not for a ksatriya. Although a responsible manin the administration of a state is required to be saintly, he shouldnot be cowardly. For example, Lord Rama was so saintly that people wereanxious to live in His kingdom (rama-rajya), but Lord Rama never showedany cowardice. Ravana was an aggressor against Rama because Hekidnapped Rama's wife, Sita, but Lord Rama gave him sufficient lessons,unparalleled in the history of the world. In Arjuna's case, however,one should consider the special type of aggressors, namely his owngrandfather, own teacher, friends, sons, grandsons, etc. Because ofthem, Arjuna thought that he should not take the severe steps necessaryagainst ordinary aggressors. Besides that, saintly persons are advisedto forgive. Such injunctions for saintly persons are more importantthan any political emergency. Arjuna considered that rather than killhis own kinsmen for political reasons, it would be better to forgivethem on grounds of religion and saintly behavior. He did not,therefore, consider such killing profitable simply for the matter oftemporary bodily happiness. After all, kingdoms and pleasures derivedtherefrom are not permanent, so why should he risk his life and eternalsalvation by killing his own kinsmen? Arjuna's addressing of Krsna as"Madhava," or the husband of the goddess of fortune, is alsosignificant in this connection. He wanted to point out to Krsna that,as husband of the goddess of fortune, He should not induce Arjuna totake up a matter which would ultimately bring about misfortune. Krsna,however, never brings misfortune to anyone, to say nothing of Hisdevotees.
TEXTS 37-38
yady apy ete na pasyanti
lobhopahata-cetasahkula-ksaya-krtam dosammitra-drohe ca patakam
katham na jneyam asmabhih
papad asman nivartitumkula-ksaya-krtam dosamprapasyadbhir janardana
SYNONYMSyadi--if; api--certainly; ete--they; na--do not; pasyanti--see; lobha--
greed; upahata--overpowered; cetasah--the hearts; kula-ksaya--inkilling the family; krtam--done; dosam--fault; mitra-drohe--quarrelingwith friends; ca--also; patakam--sinful reactions; katham--why; na--shall not; jneyam--know this; asmabhih--by us; papat--from sins; asmat-
-ourselves; nivartitum--to cease; kula-ksaya--the destruction of a
dynasty; krtam--by so doing; dosam--crime; prapasyadbhih--by those whocan see; janardana--O Krsna.
TRANSLATIONO Janardana, although these men, overtaken by greed, see no fault in
killing one's family or quarreling with friends, why should we, withknowledge of the sin, engage in these acts?
PURPORTA ksatriya is not supposed to refuse to battle or gamble when he is so
invited by some rival party. Under such obligation, Arjuna could notrefuse to fight because he was challenged by the party of Duryodhana.In this connection, Arjuna considered that the other party might beblind to the effects of such a challenge. Arjuna, however, could seethe evil consequences and could not accept the challenge. Obligation isactually binding when the effect is good, but when the effect isotherwise, then no one can be bound. Considering all these pros andcons, Arjuna decided not to fight.
TEXT 39
kula-ksaye pranasyanti
kula-dharmah sanatanahdharme naste kulam krtsnamadharmo 'bhibhavaty uta
SYNONYMSkula-ksaye--in destroying the family; pranasyanti--becomes vanquished;
kula-dharmah--the family traditions; sanatanah--eternal; dharme--inreligion; naste--being destroyed; kulam--family; krtsnam--wholesale;adharmah--irreligious; abhibhavati--transforms; uta--it is said.
TRANSLATIONWith the destruction of dynasty, the eternal family tradition is
vanquished, and thus the rest of the family becomes involved inirreligious practice.
PURPORTIn the system of the varnasrama institution there are many principles
of religious traditions to help members of the family grow properly andattain spiritual values. The elder members are responsible for suchpurifying processes in the family, beginning from birth to death. Buton the death of the elder members, such family traditions ofpurification may stop, and the remaining younger family members maydevelop irreligious habits and thereby lose their chance for spiritualsalvation. Therefore, for no purpose should the elder members of thefamily be slain.
TEXT 40
adharmabhibhavat krsna
pradusyanti kula-striyah
strisu dustasu varsneya
jayate varna-sankarah
SYNONYMSadharma--irreligion; abhibhavat--having become predominant; krsna--O
Krsna; pradusyanti--become polluted; kula-striyah--family ladies;strisu--of the womanhood; dustasu--being so polluted; varsneya--Odescendant of Vrsni; jayate--it so becomes; varna-sankarah--unwantedprogeny.
TRANSLATIONWhen irreligion is prominent in the family, O Krsna, the women of the
family become corrupt, and from the degradation of womanhood, Odescendant of Vrsni, comes unwanted progeny.
PURPORTGood population in human society is the basic principle for peace,
prosperity and spiritual progress in life. The varnasrama religion'sprinciples were so designed that the good population would prevail insociety for the general spiritual progress of state and community. Suchpopulation depends on the chastity and faithfulness of its womanhood.As children are very prone to be misled, women are similarly very proneto degradation. Therefore, both children and women require protectionby the elder members of the family. By being engaged in variousreligious practices, women will not be misled into adultery. Accordingto Canakya Pandita, women are generally not very intelligent andtherefore not trustworthy. So, the different family traditions ofreligious activities should always engage them, and thus their chastityand devotion will give birth to a good population eligible forparticipating in the varnasrama system. On the failure of suchvarnasrama-dharma, naturally the women become free to act and mix withmen, and thus adultery is indulged in at the risk of unwantedpopulation. Irresponsible men also provoke adultery in society, andthus unwanted children flood the human race at the risk of war andpestilence.
TEXT 41
sankaro narakayaiva
kula-ghnanam kulasya capatanti pitaro hy esamlupta-pindodaka-kriyah
SYNONYMSsankarah--such unwanted children; narakaya--for hellish life; eva--
certainly; kula-ghnanam--of those who are killers of the family;kulasya--of the family; ca--also; patanti--fall down; pitarah--forefathers; hi--certainly; esam--of them; lupta--stopped; pinda--offerings; udaka--water; kriyah--performances.
TRANSLATIONWhen there is increase of unwanted population, a hellish situation is
created both for the family and for those who destroy the family
tradition. In such corrupt families, there is no offering of oblations
of food and water to the ancestors.
PURPORTAccording to the rules and regulations of fruitive activities, there is
a need to offer periodical food and water to the forefathers of thefamily. This offering is performed by worship of Visnu, because eatingthe remnants of food offered to Visnu can deliver one from all kinds ofsinful actions. Sometimes the forefathers may be suffering from varioustypes of sinful reactions, and sometimes some of them cannot evenacquire a gross material body and are forced to remain in subtle bodiesas ghosts. Thus, when remnants of prasadam food are offered toforefathers by descendants, the forefathers are released from ghostlyor other kinds of miserable life. Such help rendered to forefathers isa family tradition, and those who are not in devotional life arerequired to perform such rituals. One who is engaged in the devotionallife is not required to perform such actions. Simply by performingdevotional service, one can deliver hundreds and thousands offorefathers from all kinds of misery. It is stated in the Bhagavatam(11.5.41):
devarsi-bhutapta-nrnam pitrnam
na kinkaro nayam rni ca rajansarvatmana yah saranam saranyamgato mukundam parihrtya kartam
"Anyone who has taken shelter of the lotus feet of Mukunda, the giver
of liberation, giving up all kinds of obligation, and has taken to thepath in all seriousness, owes neither duties nor obligations to thedemigods, sages, general living entities, family members, humankind orforefathers." Such obligations are automatically fulfilled byperformance of devotional service to the Supreme Personality ofGodhead.
TEXT 42
dosair etaih kula-ghnanam
varna-sankara-karakaihutsadyante jati-dharmahkula-dharmas ca sasvatah
SYNONYMSdosaih--by such faults; etaih--all these; kula-ghnanam--of the
destroyer of the family; varna-sankara--unwanted children; karakaih--bythe doers; utsadyante--causes devastation; jati-dharmah--communityprojects; kula-dharmah--family traditions; ca--also; sasvatah--eternal.
TRANSLATIONDue to the evil deeds of the destroyers of family tradition, all kinds
of community projects and family welfare activities are devastated.
PURPORTThe four orders of human society, combined with family welfare
activities as they are set forth by the institution of the sanatana-
dharma or varnasrama-dharma, are designed to enable the human being to
attain his ultimate salvation. Therefore, the breaking of the sanatana-dharma tradition by irresponsible leaders of society brings about chaosin that society, and consequently people forget the aim of life--Visnu.Such leaders are called blind, and persons who follow such leaders aresure to be led into chaos.
TEXT 43
utsanna-kula-dharmanam
manusyanam janardananarake niyatam vasobhavatity anususruma
SYNONYMSutsanna--spoiled; kula-dharmanam--of those who have the family
traditions; manusyanam--of such men; janardana--O Krsna; narake--inhell; niyatam--always; vasah--residence; bhavati--it so becomes; iti--thus; anususruma--I have heard by disciplic succession.
TRANSLATIONO Krsna, maintainer of the people, I have heard by disciplic succession
that those who destroy family traditions dwell always in hell.
PURPORTArjuna bases his argument not on his own personal experience, but on
what he has heard from the authorities. That is the way of receivingreal knowledge. One cannot reach the real point of factual knowledgewithout being helped by the right person who is already established inthat knowledge. There is a system in the varnasrama institution bywhich one has to undergo the process of atonement before death for hissinful activities. One who is always engaged in sinful activities mustutilize the process of atonement called the prayascitta. Without doingso, one surely will be transferred to hellish planets to undergomiserable lives as the result of sinful activities.
TEXT 44
aho bata mahat papam
kartum vyavasita vayamyad rajya-sukha-lobhenahantum sva-janam udyatah
SYNONYMSaho--alas; bata--how strange it is; mahat--great; papam--sins; kartum--
to perform; vyavasitah--decided; vayam--we; yat--so that; rajya--kingdom; sukha-lobhena--driven by greed for royal happiness; hantum--tokill; sva-janam--kinsmen; udyatah--trying for.
TRANSLATIONAlas, how strange it is that we are preparing to commit greatly sinful
acts, driven by the desire to enjoy royal happiness.
PURPORT
Driven by selfish motives, one may be inclined to such sinful acts as
the killing of one's own brother, father or mother. There are many suchinstances in the history of the world. But Arjuna, being a saintlydevotee of the Lord, is always conscious of moral principles andtherefore takes care to avoid such activities.
TEXT 45
yadi mam apratikaram
asastram sastra-panayahdhartarastra rane hanyustan me ksemataram bhavet
SYNONYMSyadi--even if; mam--unto me; apratikaram--without being resistant;
asastram--without being fully equipped; sastra-panayah--those withweapons in hand; dhartarastrah--the sons of Dhrtarastra; rane--in thebattlefield; hanyuh--may kill; tat--that; me--mine; ksema-taram--better; bhavet--become.
TRANSLATIONI would consider it better for the sons of Dhrtarastra to kill me
unarmed and unresisting, rather than to fight with them.
PURPORTIt is the custom--according to ksatriya fighting principles--that an
unarmed and unwilling foe should not be attacked. Arjuna, however, insuch an enigmatic position, decided he would not fight if he wereattacked by the enemy. He did not consider how much the other party wasbent upon fighting. All these symptoms are due to soft-heartednessresulting from his being a great devotee of the Lord.
TEXT 46
sanjaya uvaca
evam uktvarjunah sankhyerathopastha upavisatvisrjya sa-saram capamsoka-samvigna-manasah
SYNONYMSsanjayah--Sanjaya; uvaca--said; evam--thus; uktva--saying; arjunah--
Arjuna; sankhye--in the battlefield; ratha--chariot; upasthe--situatedon; upavisat--sat down again; visrjya--keeping aside; sa-saram--alongwith arrows; capam--the bow; soka--by lamentation; samvigna--distressed; manasah--within the mind.
TRANSLATIONSanjaya said: Arjuna, having thus spoken on the battlefield, cast aside
his bow and arrows and sat down on the chariot, his mind overwhelmedwith grief.
