All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or to
evaluate dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website ofthe publishers, www.Krishna.com .
Chapter 4
Transcendental Knowledge
TEXT 1
sri-bhagavan uvaca
imam vivasvate yogamproktavan aham avyayamvivasvan manave prahamanur iksvakave 'bravit
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; imam--
this; vivasvate--unto the sun-god; yogam--the science of one'srelationship to the Supreme; proktavan--instructed; aham--I; avyayam--imperishable; vivasvan--Vivasvan (the sun-god's name); manave--unto thefather of mankind (of the name Vaivasvata); praha--told; manuh--thefather of mankind; iksvakave--unto King Iksvaku; abravit--said.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: I instructed this imperishable science of yoga
to the sun-god, Vivasvan, and Vivasvan instructed it to Manu, thefather of mankind, and Manu in turn instructed it to Iksvaku.
PURPORTHerein we find the history of the Bhagavad-gita traced from a remote
time when it was delivered to the royal order, the Kings of allplanets. This science is especially meant for the protection of theinhabitants, and therefore the royal order should understand it inorder to be able to rule the citizens and protect them from thematerial bondage to lust. Human life is meant for cultivation ofspiritual knowledge, in eternal relationship with the SupremePersonality of Godhead, and the executive heads of all states and allplanets are obliged to impart this lesson to the citizens by education,culture and devotion. In other words, the executive heads of all statesare intended to spread the science of Krsna consciousness so that thepeople may take advantage of this great science and pursue a successfulpath, utilizing the opportunity of the human form of life.In this millennium, the sun-god is known as Vivasvan, the king of thesun, which is the origin of all planets within the solar system. In theBrahma-samhita (5.52) it is stated:
yac-caksur esa savita sakala-grahanam
raja samasta-sura-murtir asesa-tejahyasyajnaya bhramati sambhrta-kala-cakrogovindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami
"Let me worship," Lord Brahma said, "the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Govinda [Krsna], who is the original person and under whoseorder the sun, which is the king of all planets, is assuming immensepower and heat. The sun represents the eye of the Lord and traversesits orbit in obedience to His order."The sun is the king of the planets, and the sun-god (at present of thename Vivasvan) rules the sun planet, which is controlling all otherplanets by supplying heat and light. He is rotating under the order ofKrsna, and Lord Krsna originally made Vivasvan His first disciple tounderstand the science of Bhagavad-gita. The Gita is not, therefore, aspeculative treatise for the insignificant mundane scholar but is astandard book of knowledge coming down from time immemorial.In the Mahabharata (Santi-parva 348.51-52) we can trace out the historyof the Gita as follows:
treta-yugadau ca tato
vivasvan manave dadaumanus ca loka-bhrty-arthamsutayeksvakave dadau
iksvakuna ca kathito
vyapya lokan avasthitah
"In the beginning of the Treta-yuga [millennium] this science of the
relationship with the Supreme was delivered by Vivasvan to Manu. Manu,being the father of mankind, gave it to his son Maharaja Iksvaku, theking of this earth planet and forefather of the Raghu dynasty in whichLord Ramacandra appeared." Therefore, Bhagavad-gita existed in thehuman society from the time of Maharaja Iksvaku.At the present moment we have just passed through five thousand yearsof the Kali-yuga, which lasts 432,000 years. Before this there was theDvapara-yuga (800,000 years), and before that there was Treta-yuga(1,200,000 years). Thus, some 2,005,000 years ago, Manu spoke theBhagavad-gita to his disciple and son Maharaja Iksvaku, the king ofthis planet earth. The age of the current Manu is calculated to lastsome 305,300,000 years, of which 120,400,000 have passed. Acceptingthat before the birth of Manu the Gita was spoken by the Lord to Hisdisciple the sun-god Vivasvan, a rough estimate is that the Gita wasspoken at least 120,400,000 years ago; and in human society it has beenextant for two million years. It was respoken by the Lord again toArjuna about five thousand years ago. That is the rough estimate of thehistory of the Gita, according to the Gita itself and according to theversion of the speaker, Lord Sri Krsna. It was spoken to the sun-godVivasvan because he is also a ksatriya and is the father of allksatriyas who are descendants of the sun-god, or the surya-vamsaksatriyas. Because Bhagavad-gita is as good as the Vedas, being spokenby the Supreme Personality of Godhead, this knowledge is apauruseya,superhuman. Since the Vedic instructions are accepted as they are,without human interpretation, the Gita must therefore be acceptedwithout mundane interpretation. The mundane wranglers may speculate onthe Gita in their own ways, but that is not Bhagavad-gita as it is.Therefore, Bhagavad-gita has to be accepted as it is, from thedisciplic succession, and it is described herein that the Lord spoke tothe sun-god, the sun-god spoke to his son Manu, and Manu spoke to hisson Iksvaku.
TEXT 2
evam parampara-praptam
imam rajarsayo viduhsa kaleneha mahatayogo nastah parantapa
SYNONYMSevam--thus; parampara--disciplic succession; praptam--received; imam--
this science; raja-rsayah--the saintly kings; viduh--understood; sah--that knowledge; kalena--in the course of time; iha--in this world;mahata--by great; yogah--the science of one's relationship with theSupreme; nastah--scattered; parantapa--O Arjuna, subduer of theenemies.
TRANSLATIONThis supreme science was thus received through the chain of disciplic
succession, and the saintly kings understood it in that way. But incourse of time the succession was broken, and therefore the science asit is appears to be lost.
PURPORTIt is clearly stated that the Gita was especially meant for the saintly
kings because they were to execute its purpose in ruling over thecitizens. Certainly Bhagavad-gita was never meant for the demonicpersons, who would dissipate its value for no one's benefit and woulddevise all types of interpretations according to personal whims. Assoon as the original purpose was scattered by the motives of theunscrupulous commentators, there arose the need to reestablish thedisciplic succession. Five thousand years ago it was detected by theLord Himself that the disciplic succession was broken, and therefore Hedeclared that the purpose of the Gita appeared to be lost. In the sameway, at the present moment also there are so many editions of the Gita(especially in English), but almost all of them are not according toauthorized disciplic succession. There are innumerable interpretationsrendered by different mundane scholars, but almost all of them do notaccept the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, although they make agood business on the words of Sri Krsna. This spirit is demonic,because demons do not believe in God but simply enjoy the property ofthe Supreme. Since there is a great need of an edition of the Gita inEnglish, as it is received by the parampara (disciplic succession)system, an attempt is made herewith to fulfill this great want.Bhagavad-gita--accepted as it is--is a great boon to humanity; but ifit is accepted as a treatise of philosophical speculations, it issimply a waste of time.
TEXT 3
sa evayam maya te 'dya
yogah proktah puratanahbhakto 'si me sakha cetirahasyam hy etad uttamam
SYNONYMS
sah--the same ancient; eva--certainly; ayam--this; maya--by Me; te--
unto you; adya--today; yogah--the science of yoga; proktah--spoken;puratanah--very old; bhaktah--devotee; asi--you are; me--My; sakha--friend; ca--also; iti--therefore; rahasyam--mystery; hi--certainly;etat--this; uttamam--transcendental.
TRANSLATIONThat very ancient science of the relationship with the Supreme is today
told by Me to you because you are My devotee as well as My friend;therefore you can understand the transcendental mystery of thisscience.
PURPORTThere are two classes of men, namely the devotee and the demon. The
Lord selected Arjuna as the recipient of this great science owing tohis being a devotee of the Lord, but for the demon it is not possibleto understand this great mysterious science. There are a number ofeditions of this great book of knowledge, and some of them havecommentaries by the devotees and some of them have commentaries by thedemons. Commentation by the devotees is real, whereas that of the demonis useless. Arjuna accepts Sri Krsna as the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, and any commentary on the Gita following in the footsteps ofArjuna is real devotional service to the cause of this great science.The demonic, however, concoct something about Krsna and mislead thepublic and the general readers from the path of Krsna's instructions.One should try to follow the disciplic succession from Arjuna, and thusbe benefited.
TEXT 4
arjuna uvaca
aparam bhavato janmaparam janma vivasvatahkatham etad vijaniyamtvam adau proktavan iti
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; aparam--junior; bhavatah--Your; janma--
birth; param--superior; janma--birth; vivasvatah--of the sun-god;katham--how; etat--this; vijaniyam--shall I understand; tvam--You;adau--in the beginning; proktavan--instructed; iti--thus.
TRANSLATIONArjuna said: The sun-god Vivasvan is senior by birth to You. How am I
to understand that in the beginning You instructed this science to him?
PURPORTArjuna is an accepted devotee of the Lord, so how could he not believe
Krsna's words? The fact is that Arjuna is not inquiring for himself butfor those who do not believe in the Supreme Personality of Godhead orfor the demons who do not like the idea that Krsna should be acceptedas the Supreme Personality of Godhead; for them only Arjuna inquires onthis point, as if he were himself not aware of the Personality of
Godhead, or Krsna. As it will be evident from the Tenth Chapter, Arjuna
knew perfectly well that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,the fountainhead of everything and the last word in transcendence. Ofcourse, Krsna also appeared as the son of Devaki on this earth. HowKrsna remained the same Supreme Personality of Godhead, the eternaloriginal person, is very difficult for an ordinary man to understand.Therefore, to clarify this point, Arjuna put this question before Krsnaso that He Himself could speak authoritatively. That Krsna is thesupreme authority is accepted by the whole world, not only at present,but from time immemorial, and the demons alone reject Him. Anyway,since Krsna is the authority accepted by all, Arjuna put this questionbefore Him in order that Krsna would describe Himself without beingdepicted by the demons who always try to distort Him in a wayunderstandable to the demons and their followers. It is necessary thateveryone, for his own interest, know the science of Krsna. Therefore,when Krsna Himself speaks about Himself, it is auspicious for all theworlds. To the demons, such explanations by Krsna Himself may appear tobe strange because the demons always study Krsna from their ownstandpoint, but those who are devotees heartily welcome the statementsof Krsna when they are spoken by Krsna Himself. The devotees willalways worship such authoritative statements of Krsna because they arealways eager to know more and more about Him. The atheists, whoconsider Krsna an ordinary man, may in this way come to know that Krsnais superhuman, that He is sac-cid-ananda-vigraha--the eternal form ofbliss and knowledge--that He is transcendental, and that He is abovethe domination of the modes of material nature and above the influenceof time and space. A devotee of Krsna, like Arjuna, is undoubtedlyabove any misunderstanding of the transcendental position of Krsna.Arjuna's putting this question before the Lord is simply an attempt bythe devotee to defy the atheistic attitude of persons who considerKrsna to be an ordinary human being, subject to the modes of materialnature.
TEXT 5
sri-bhagavan uvaca
bahuni me vyatitanijanmani tava carjunatany aham veda sarvanina tvam vettha parantapa
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Personality of Godhead said; bahuni--many; me--
of Mine; vyatitani--have passed; janmani--births; tava--of yours; ca--and also; arjuna--O Arjuna; tani--all those; aham--I; veda--do know;sarvani--all; na--not; tvam--yourself; vettha--know; parantapa--Osubduer of the enemy.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: Many, many births both you and I have passed. I
can remember all of them, but you cannot, O subduer of the enemy!
PURPORTIn the Brahma-samhita (5.33) we have information of many, many
incarnations of the Lord. It is stated there:
advaitam acyutam anadim ananta-rupam
adyam purana-purusam nava-yauvanam cavedesu durlabham adurlabham atma-bhaktaugovindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami
"I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda [Krsna], who is
the original person--absolute, infallible, without beginning. Althoughexpanded into unlimited forms, still the same original, the oldest, andthe person always appearing as a fresh youth. Such eternal, blissful,all-knowing forms of the Lord are usually understood by the best Vedicscholars, but they are always manifest to pure, unalloyed devotees."It is also stated in Brahma-samhita (5.39):
ramadi-murtisu kala-niyamena tisthan
nanavataram akarod bhuvanesu kintukrsnah svayam samabhavat paramah puman yogovindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami
"I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda [Krsna], who is
always situated in various incarnations such as Rama, Nrsimha and manysubincarnations as well, but who is the original Personality of Godheadknown as Krsna, and who incarnates personally also."In the Vedas also it is said that the Lord, although one without asecond, manifests Himself in innumerable forms. He is like the vaiduryastone, which changes color yet still remains one. All those multiformsare understood by the pure, unalloyed devotees, but not by a simplestudy of the Vedas (vedesu durlabham adurlabham atma-bhaktau). Devoteeslike Arjuna are constant companions of the Lord, and whenever the Lordincarnates, the associate devotees also incarnate in order to serve theLord in different capacities. Arjuna is one of these devotees, and inthis verse it is understood that some millions of years ago when LordKrsna spoke the Bhagavad-gita to the sun-god Vivasvan, Arjuna, in adifferent capacity, was also present. But the difference between theLord and Arjuna is that the Lord remembered the incident whereas Arjunacould not remember. That is the difference between the part-and-parcelliving entity and the Supreme Lord. Although Arjuna is addressed hereinas the mighty hero who could subdue the enemies, he is unable to recallwhat had happened in his various past births. Therefore, a livingentity, however great he may be in the material estimation, can neverequal the Supreme Lord. Anyone who is a constant companion of the Lordis certainly a liberated person, but he cannot be equal to the Lord.The Lord is described in the Brahma-samhita as infallible (acyuta),which means that He never forgets Himself, even though He is inmaterial contact. Therefore, the Lord and the living entity can neverbe equal in all respects, even if the living entity is as liberated asArjuna. Although Arjuna is a devotee of the Lord, he sometimes forgetsthe nature of the Lord, but by the divine grace a devotee can at onceunderstand the infallible condition of the Lord, whereas a nondevoteeor a demon cannot understand this transcendental nature. Consequentlythese descriptions in the Gita cannot be understood by demonic brains.Krsna remembered acts which were performed by Him millions of yearsbefore, but Arjuna could not, despite the fact that both Krsna andArjuna are eternal in nature. We may also note herein that a livingentity forgets everything due to his change of body, but the Lordremembers because He does not change His sac-cid-ananda body. He isadvaita, which means there is no distinction between His body andHimself. Everything in relation to Him is spirit--whereas the
conditioned soul is different from his material body. And, because the
Lord's body and self are identical, His position is always differentfrom the ordinary living entity, even when He descends to the materialplatform. The demons cannot adjust themselves to this transcendentalnature of the Lord, which the Lord Himself explains in the followingverse.
TEXT 6
ajo 'pi sann avyayatma
bhutanam isvaro 'pi sanprakrtim svam adhisthayasambhavamy atma-mayaya
SYNONYMSajah--unborn; api--although; san--being so; avyaya--without
deterioration; atma--body; bhutanam--all those who are born; isvarah--the Supreme Lord; api--although; san--being so; prakrtim--transcendental form; svam--of Myself; adhisthaya--being so situated;sambhavami--I do incarnate; atma-mayaya--by My internal energy.
TRANSLATIONAlthough I am unborn and My transcendental body never deteriorates, and
although I am the Lord of all sentient beings, I still appear in everymillennium in My original transcendental form.
PURPORTThe Lord has spoken about the peculiarity of His birth: although He may
appear like an ordinary person, He remembers everything of His many,many past "births," whereas a common man cannot remember what he hasdone even a few hours before. If someone is asked what he did exactlyat the same time one day earlier, it would be very difficult for acommon man to answer immediately. He would surely have to dredge hismemory to recall what he was doing exactly at the same time one daybefore. And yet, men often dare claim to be God, or Krsna. One shouldnot be misled by such meaningless claims. Then again, the Lord explainsHis prakrti, or His form. Prakrti means nature, as well as svarupa, orone's own form. The Lord says that He appears in His own body. He doesnot change His body, as the common living entity changes from one bodyto another. The conditioned soul may have one kind of body in thepresent birth, but he has a different body in the next birth. In thematerial world, the living entity has no fixed body but transmigratesfrom one body to another. The Lord, however, does not do so. WheneverHe appears, He does so in the same original body, by His internalpotency. In other words, Krsna appears in this material world in Hisoriginal eternal form, with two hands, holding a flute. He appearsexactly in His eternal body, uncontaminated by this material world.Although He appears in the same transcendental body and is Lord of theuniverse, it still appears that He takes His birth like an ordinaryliving entity. Despite the fact Lord Krsna grows from childhood toboyhood and from boyhood to youth, astonishingly enough He never agesbeyond youth. At the time of the Battle of Kuruksetra, He had manygrandchildren at home; or, in other words, He had sufficiently aged bymaterial calculations. Still He looked just like a young man twenty ortwenty-five years old. We never see a picture of Krsna in old age
because He never grows old like us, although He is the oldest person in
the whole creation--past, present, and future. Neither His body nor Hisintelligence ever deteriorates or changes. Therefore, it is clear thatin spite of His being in the material world, He is the same unborn,eternal form of bliss and knowledge, changeless in His transcendentalbody and intelligence. Factually, His appearance and disappearance islike the sun's rising, moving before us, and then disappearing from oureyesight. When the sun is out of sight, we think that the sun is set,and when the sun is before our eyes, we think that the sun is on thehorizon. Actually, the sun is always in its fixed position, but owingto our defective, insufficient senses, we calculate the appearance anddisappearance of the sun in the sky. And, because His appearance anddisappearance are completely different from that of any ordinary,common living entity, it is evident that He is eternal, blissfulknowledge by His internal potency--and He is never contaminated bymaterial nature. The Vedas also confirm that the Supreme Personality ofGodhead is unborn, yet He still appears to take His birth in multi-manifestations. The Vedic supplementary literatures also confirm thateven though the Lord appears to be taking His birth, He is stillwithout change of body. In the Bhagavatam, He appears before His motheras Narayana, with four hands and the decorations of the six kinds offull opulences. His appearance in His original eternal form is Hiscauseless mercy, according to the Visva-kosa dictionary. The Lord isconscious of all of His previous appearances and disappearances, but acommon living entity forgets everything about his past body as soon ashe gets another body. He is the Lord of all living entities because Heperforms wonderful and superhuman activities while He is on this earth.Therefore, the Lord is always the same Absolute Truth and is withoutdifferentiation between His form and self, or between His quality andbody. A question may now be raised as to why the Lord appears anddisappears in this world. This is explained in the next verse.
TEXT 7
yada yada hi dharmasya
glanir bhavati bharataabhyutthanam adharmasyatadatmanam srjamy aham
SYNONYMSyada--whenever; yada--wherever; hi--certainly; dharmasya--of religion;
glanih--discrepancies; bhavati--manifested, becomes; bharata--Odescendant of Bharata; abhyutthanam--predominance; adharmasya--ofirreligion; tada--at that time; atmanam--self; srjami--manifest; aham--I.
TRANSLATIONWhenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O
descendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion--at thattime I descend Myself.
PURPORTThe word srjami is significant herein. Srjami cannot be used in the
sense of creation, because, according to the previous verse, there isno creation of the Lord's form or body, since all of the forms are
eternally existent. Therefore, srjami means that the Lord manifests
Himself as He is. Although the Lord appears on schedule, namely at theend of the Dvapara-yuga of the twenty-eighth millennium of the seventhManu in one day of Brahma, still He has no obligation to adhere to suchrules and regulations, because He is completely free to act in manyways at His will. He therefore appears by His own will whenever thereis a predominance of irreligiosity and a disappearance of truereligion. Principles of religion are laid down in the Vedas, and anydiscrepancy in the matter of properly executing the rules of the Vedasmakes one irreligious. In the Bhagavatam it is stated that suchprinciples are the laws of the Lord. Only the Lord can manufacture asystem of religion. The Vedas are also accepted as originally spoken bythe Lord Himself to Brahma, from within his heart. Therefore, theprinciples of dharma, or religion, are the direct orders of the SupremePersonality of Godhead (dharmam tu saksad bhagavat-pranitam). Theseprinciples are clearly indicated throughout the Bhagavad-gita. Thepurpose of the Vedas is to establish such principles under the order ofthe Supreme Lord, and the Lord directly orders, at the end of the Gita,that the highest principle of religion is to surrender unto Him only,and nothing more. The Vedic principles push one towards completesurrender unto Him; and, whenever such principles are disturbed by thedemoniac, the Lord appears. From the Bhagavatam we understand that LordBuddha is the incarnation of Krsna who appeared when materialism wasrampant and materialists were using the pretext of the authority of theVedas. Although there are certain restrictive rules and regulationsregarding animal sacrifice for particular purposes in the Vedas, peopleof demonic tendency still took to animal sacrifice without reference tothe Vedic principles. Lord Buddha appeared to stop this nonsense and toestablish the Vedic principles of nonviolence. Therefore each and everyavatara, or incarnation of the Lord, has a particular mission, and theyare all described in the revealed scriptures. No one should be acceptedas an avatara unless he is referred to by scriptures. It is not a factthat the Lord appears only on Indian soil. He can advent Himselfanywhere and everywhere, and whenever He desires to appear. In each andevery incarnation, He speaks as much about religion as can beunderstood by the particular people under their particularcircumstances. But the mission is the same--to lead people to Godconsciousness and obedience to the principles of religion. Sometimes Hedescends personally, and sometimes He sends His bona fiderepresentative in the form of His son, or servant, or Himself in somedisguised form.The principles of Bhagavad-gita were spoken to Arjuna, and, for thatmatter, to other highly elevated persons, because he was highlyadvanced compared to ordinary persons in other parts of the world. Twoplus two equals four is a mathematical principle that is true both inthe beginner's arithmetic class and in the advanced class as well.Still, there are higher and lower mathematics. In all incarnations ofthe Lord, therefore, the same principles are taught, but they appear tobe higher and lower in varied circumstances. The higher principles ofreligion begin with the acceptance of the four orders and the fourstatuses of social life, as will be explained later. The whole purposeof the mission of incarnations is to arouse Krsna consciousnesseverywhere. Such consciousness is manifest and nonmanifest only underdifferent circumstances.
TEXT 8
paritranaya sadhunam
vinasaya ca duskrtam
dharma-samsthapanarthayasambhavami yuge yuge
SYNONYMSparitranaya--for the deliverance; sadhunam--of the devotees; vinasaya--
for the annihilation; ca--also; duskrtam--of the miscreants; dharma--principles of religion; samsthapana-arthaya--to reestablish;sambhavami--I do appear; yuge--millennium; yuge--after millennium.
TRANSLATIONIn order to deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as well
as to reestablish the principles of religion, I advent Myself,millennium after millennium.
PURPORTAccording to Bhagavad-gita, a sadhu (holy man) is a man in Krsna
consciousness. A person may appear to be irreligious, but if he has thequalifications of Krsna consciousness wholly and fully, he is to beunderstood to be a sadhu. And duskrtam applies to one who doesn't carefor Krsna consciousness. Such miscreants, or duskrtam, are described asfoolish and the lowest of mankind, even though they may be decoratedwith mundane education; whereas another person, who is one hundredpercent engaged in Krsna consciousness, is accepted as a sadhu, eventhough such a person may be neither learned nor well cultured. As faras the atheistic are concerned, it is not necessary for the SupremeLord to appear as He is to destroy them, as He did with the demonsRavana and Kamsa. The Lord has many agents who are quite competent tovanquish demons. But the Lord especially descends to appease Hisunalloyed devotees, who are always harassed by the demoniac. The demonharasses the devotee, even though the latter may happen to be his kin.Although Prahlada Maharaja was the son of Hiranyakasipu, he wasnonetheless persecuted by his father; although Devaki, the mother ofKrsna, was the sister of Kamsa, she and her husband Vasudeva werepersecuted only because Krsna was to be born of them. So Lord Krsnaappeared primarily to deliver Devaki, rather than kill Kamsa, but bothwere performed simultaneously. Therefore it is said here that todeliver the devotee and vanquish the demon miscreants, the Lord appearsin different incarnations.In the Caitanya-caritamrta of Krsnadasa Kaviraja, the following verses(Madhya 20.263-264) summarize these principles of incarnation:
srsti-hetu yei murti prapance avatare
sei isvara-murti 'avatara' nama dhare
mayatita paravyome sabara avasthana
visve avatari' dhare 'avatara' nama
"The avatara, or incarnation of Godhead, descends from the kingdom of
God for material manifestation. And the particular form of thePersonality of Godhead who so descends is called an incarnation, oravatara. Such incarnations are situated in the spiritual world, thekingdom of God. When they descend to the material creation, they assumethe name avatara."
There are various kinds of avataras, such as purusavataras,
gunavataras, lilavataras, sakty-avesa avataras, manvantara-avataras andyugavataras--all appearing on schedule all over the universe. But LordKrsna is the primeval Lord, the fountainhead of all avataras. Lord SriKrsna descends for the specific purpose of mitigating the anxieties ofthe pure devotees, who are very anxious to see Him in His originalVrndavana pastimes. Therefore, the prime purpose of the Krsna avatarais to satisfy His unalloyed devotees.The Lord says that He incarnates Himself in every millennium. Thisindicates that He incarnates also in the Age of Kali. As stated in theSrimad-Bhagavatam, the incarnation in the Age of Kali is Lord CaitanyaMahaprabhu, who spread the worship of Krsna by the sankirtana movement(congregational chanting of the holy names) and spread Krsnaconsciousness throughout India. He predicted that this culture ofsankirtana would be broadcast all over the world, from town to town andvillage to village. Lord Caitanya as the incarnation of Krsna, thePersonality of Godhead, is described secretly but not directly in theconfidential parts of the revealed scriptures, such as the Upanisads,Mahabharata, Bhagavatam, etc. The devotees of Lord Krsna are muchattracted by the sankirtana movement of Lord Caitanya. This avatara ofthe Lord does not kill the miscreants, but delivers them by Hiscauseless mercy.
TEXT 9
janma karma ca me divyam
evam yo vetti tattvatahtyaktva deham punar janmanaiti mam eti so 'rjuna
SYNONYMSjanma--birth; karma--work; ca--also; me--of Mine; divyam--
transcendental; evam--like this; yah--anyone who; vetti--knows;tattvatah--in reality; tyaktva--leaving aside; deham--this body; punah--again; janma--birth; na--never; eti--does attain; mam--unto Me; eti--does attain; sah--he; arjuna--O Arjuna.
TRANSLATIONOne who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities
does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this materialworld, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna.
PURPORTThe Lord's descent from His transcendental abode is already explained
in the 6th verse. One who can understand the truth of the appearance ofthe Personality of Godhead is already liberated from material bondage,and therefore he returns to the kingdom of God immediately afterquitting this present material body. Such liberation of the livingentity from material bondage is not at all easy. The impersonalists andthe yogis attain liberation only after much trouble and many, manybirths. Even then, the liberation they achieve--merging into theimpersonal brahmajyoti of the Lord--is only partial, and there is therisk of returning again to this material world. But the devotee, simplyby understanding the transcendental nature of the body and activitiesof the Lord, attains the abode of the Lord after ending this body and
does not run the risk of returning again to this material world. In the
Brahma-samhita (5.33) it is stated that the Lord has many, many formsand incarnations: advaitam acyutam anadim ananta-rupam. Although thereare many transcendental forms of the Lord, they are still one and thesame Supreme Personality of Godhead. One has to understand this factwith conviction, although it is incomprehensible to mundane scholarsand empiric philosophers. As stated in the Vedas (Purusa-bodhiniUpanisad):
eko devo nitya-lilanurakto
bhakta-vyapi hrdy antar-atma
"The one Supreme Personality of Godhead is eternally engaged in many,
many transcendental forms in relationships with His unalloyeddevotees." This Vedic version is confirmed in this verse of the Gitapersonally by the Lord. He who accepts this truth on the strength ofthe authority of the Vedas and of the Supreme Personality of Godheadand who does not waste time in philosophical speculations attains thehighest perfectional stage of liberation. Simply by accepting thistruth on faith, one can, without a doubt, attain liberation. The Vedicversion, tat tvam asi, is actually applied in this case. Anyone whounderstands Lord Krsna to be the Supreme, or who says unto the Lord"You are the same Supreme Brahman, the Personality of Godhead," iscertainly liberated instantly, and consequently his entrance into thetranscendental association of the Lord is guaranteed. In other words,such a faithful devotee of the Lord attains perfection, and this isconfirmed by the following Vedic assertion:(Svetasvatara Upanisad 3.8)
tam eva viditvati mrtyum eti
nanyah pantha vidyate 'yanaya
One can attain the perfect stage of liberation from birth and death
simply by knowing the Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thereis no alternative because anyone who does not understand Lord Krsna asthe Supreme Personality of Godhead is surely in the mode of ignorance.Consequently he will not attain salvation simply, so to speak, bylicking the outer surface of the bottle of honey, or by interpretingthe Bhagavad-gita according to mundane scholarship. Such empiricphilosophers may assume very important roles in the material world, butthey are not necessarily eligible for liberation. Such puffed-upmundane scholars have to wait for the causeless mercy of the devotee ofthe Lord. One should therefore cultivate Krsna consciousness with faithand knowledge, and in this way attain perfection.
TEXT 10
vita-raga-bhaya-krodha
man-maya mam upasritahbahavo jnana-tapasaputa mad-bhavam agatah
SYNONYMSvita--freed from; raga--attachment; bhaya--fear; krodhah--anger; mat-
maya--fully in Me; mam--unto Me; upasritah--being fully situated;bahavah--many; jnana--knowledge; tapasa--by penance; putah--beingpurified; mat-bhavam--transcendental love for Me; agatah--attained.
TRANSLATION
Being freed from attachment, fear and anger, being fully absorbed in Me
and taking refuge in Me, many, many persons in the past became purifiedby knowledge of Me--and thus they all attained transcendental love forMe.
PURPORTAs described above, it is very difficult for a person who is too
materially affected to understand the personal nature of the SupremeAbsolute Truth. Generally, people who are attached to the bodilyconception of life are so absorbed in materialism that it is almostimpossible for them to understand that there is a transcendental bodywhich is imperishable, full of knowledge and eternally blissful. In thematerialistic concept, the body is perishable, full of ignorance andcompletely miserable. Therefore, people in general keep this samebodily idea in mind when they are informed of the personal form of theLord. For such materialistic men, the form of the gigantic materialmanifestation is supreme. Consequently they consider the Supreme to beimpersonal. And because they are too materially absorbed, theconception of retaining the personality after liberation from matterfrightens them. When they are informed that spiritual life is alsoindividual and personal, they become afraid of becoming persons again,and so they naturally prefer a kind of merging into the impersonalvoid. Generally, they compare the living entities to the bubbles of theocean, which merge into the ocean. That is the highest perfection ofspiritual existence attainable without individual personality. This isa kind of fearful stage of life, devoid of perfect knowledge ofspiritual existence. Furthermore there are many persons who cannotunderstand spiritual existence at all. Being embarrassed by so manytheories and by contradictions of various types of philosophicalspeculation, they become disgusted or angry and foolishly conclude thatthere is no supreme cause and that everything is ultimately void. Suchpeople are in a diseased condition of life. Some people are toomaterially attached and therefore do not give attention to spirituallife, some of them want to merge into the supreme spiritual cause, andsome of them disbelieve in everything, being angry at all sorts ofspiritual speculation out of hopelessness. This last class of men taketo the shelter of some kind of intoxication, and their affectivehallucinations are sometimes accepted as spiritual vision. One has toget rid of all three stages of attachment to the material world,negligence of spiritual life, fear of a spiritual personal identity,and the conception of void that underlies the frustration of life. Toget free from these three stages of the material concept of life, onehas to take complete shelter of the Lord, guided by the bona fidespiritual master, and follow the disciplines and regulative principlesof devotional life. The last stage of the devotional life is calledbhava, or transcendental love of Godhead.According to Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.4.15-16), the science ofdevotional service:
adau sraddha tatah sadhu-
sango 'tha bhajana-kriyatato 'nartha-nivrttih syattato nistha rucis tatah
athasaktis tato bhavas
tatah premabhyudancati
sadhakanam ayam premnahpradurbhave bhavet kramah
"In the beginning one must have a preliminary desire for self-
realization. This will bring one to the stage of trying to associatewith persons who are spiritually elevated. In the next stage onebecomes initiated by an elevated spiritual master, and under hisinstruction the neophyte devotee begins the process of devotionalservice. By execution of devotional service under the guidance of thespiritual master, one becomes free from all material attachment,attains steadiness in self-realization, and acquires a taste forhearing about the Absolute Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna. Thistaste leads one further forward to attachment for Krsna consciousness,which is matured in bhava, or the preliminary stage of transcendentallove of God. Real love for God is called prema, the highestperfectional stage of life." In the prema stage there is constantengagement in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. So, by theslow process of devotional service, under the guidance of the bona fidespiritual master, one can attain the highest stage, being freed fromall material attachment, from the fearfulness of one's individualspiritual personality, and from the frustrations resulting from voidphilosophy. Then one can ultimately attain to the abode of the SupremeLord.
TEXT 11
ye yatha mam prapadyante
tams tathaiva bhajamy ahammama vartmanuvartantemanusyah partha sarvasah
SYNONYMSye--all of them; yatha--as; mam--unto Me; prapadyante--surrender; tan--
unto them; tatha--so; eva--certainly; bhajami--do I reward; aham--I;mama--My; vartma--path; anuvartante--do follow; manusyah--all men;partha--O son of Prtha; sarvasah--in all respects.
TRANSLATIONAll of them--as they surrender unto Me--I reward accordingly. Everyone
follows My path in all respects, O son of Prtha.
PURPORTEveryone is searching for Krsna in the different aspects of His
manifestations. Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is partiallyrealized in His impersonal brahmajyoti effulgence and as the all-pervading Supersoul dwelling within everything, including the particlesof atoms. But Krsna is only fully realized by His pure devotees.Consequently, Krsna is the object of everyone's realization, and thusanyone and everyone is satisfied according to one's desire to have Him.In the transcendental world also, Krsna reciprocates with His puredevotees in the transcendental attitude, just as the devotee wants Him.One devotee may want Krsna as supreme master, another as his personalfriend, another as his son, and still another as his lover. Krsnarewards all the devotees equally, according to their different
intensities of love for Him. In the material world, the same
reciprocations of feelings are there, and they are equally exchanged bythe Lord with the different types of worshipers. The pure devotees bothhere and in the transcendental abode associate with Him in person andare able to render personal service to the Lord and thus derivetranscendental bliss in His loving service. As for those who areimpersonalists and who want to commit spiritual suicide by annihilatingthe individual existence of the living entity, Krsna helps also byabsorbing them into His effulgence. Such impersonalists do not agree toaccept the eternal, blissful Personality of Godhead; consequently theycannot relish the bliss of transcendental personal service to the Lord,having extinguished their individuality. Some of them, who are notsituated even in the impersonal existence, return to this materialfield to exhibit their dormant desires for activities. They are notadmitted into the spiritual planets, but they are again given a chanceto act on the material planets. For those who are fruitive workers, theLord awards the desired results of their prescribed duties, as theyajnesvara; and those who are yogis seeking mystic powers are awardedsuch powers. In other words, everyone is dependent for success upon Hismercy alone, and all kinds of spiritual processes are but differentdegrees of success on the same path. Unless, therefore, one comes tothe highest perfection of Krsna consciousness, all attempts remainimperfect, as is stated in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (2.3.10):
akamah sarva-kamo va
moksa-kama udara-dhihtivrena bhakti-yogenayajeta purusam param
"Whether one is without desire [the condition of the devotees], or is
desirous of all fruitive results, or is after liberation, one shouldwith all efforts try to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead forcomplete perfection, culminating in Krsna consciousness."
TEXT 12
kanksantah karmanam siddhim
yajanta iha devatahksipram hi manuse lokesiddhir bhavati karma-ja
SYNONYMSkanksantah--desiring; karmanam--of fruitive activities; siddhim--
perfection; yajante--worship by sacrifices; iha--in the material world;devatah--the demigods; ksipram--very quickly; hi--certainly; manuse--inhuman society; loke--within this world; siddhih bhavati--becomessuccessful; karma-ja--the fruitive worker.
TRANSLATIONMen in this world desire success in fruitive activities, and therefore
they worship the demigods. Quickly, of course, men get results fromfruitive work in this world.
PURPORT
There is a great misconception about the gods or demigods of this
material world, and men of less intelligence, although passing as greatscholars, take these demigods to be various forms of the Supreme Lord.Actually, the demigods are not different forms of God, but they areGod's different parts and parcels. God is one, and the parts andparcels are many. The Vedas say, nityo nityanam: God is one. Isvarahparamah krsnah. The Supreme God is one--Krsna--and the demigods aredelegated with powers to manage this material world. These demigods areall living entities (nityanam) with different grades of material power.They cannot be equal to the Supreme God--Narayana, Visnu, or Krsna.Anyone who thinks that God and the demigods are on the same level iscalled an atheist, or pasandi. Even the great demigods like Brahma andSiva cannot be compared to the Supreme Lord. In fact, the Lord isworshiped by demigods such as Brahma and Siva (siva-virinci-nutam). Yetcuriously enough there are many human leaders who are worshiped byfoolish men under the misunderstanding of anthropomorphism orzoomorphism. Iha devatah denotes a powerful man or demigod of thismaterial world. But Narayana, Visnu, or Krsna, the Supreme Personalityof Godhead, does not belong to this world. He is above, ortranscendental to, material creation. Even Sripada Sankaracarya, theleader of the impersonalists, maintains that Narayana, or Krsna, isbeyond this material creation. However, foolish people (hrta-jnana)worship the demigods because they want immediate results. They get theresults, but do not know that results so obtained are temporary and aremeant for less intelligent persons. The intelligent person is in Krsnaconsciousness, and he has no need to worship the paltry demigods forsome immediate, temporary benefit. The demigods of this material world,as well as their worshipers, will vanish with the annihilation of thismaterial world. The boons of the demigods are material and temporary.Both the material worlds and their inhabitants, including the demigods,and their worshipers, are bubbles in the cosmic ocean. In this world,however, human society is mad after temporary things such as thematerial opulence of possessing land, family and enjoyableparaphernalia. To achieve such temporary things, they worship thedemigods or powerful men in human society. If a man gets someministership in the government by worshiping a political leader, heconsiders that he has achieved a great boon. All of them are thereforekowtowing to the so-called leaders or "big guns" in order to achievetemporary boons, and they indeed achieve such things. Such foolish menare not interested in Krsna consciousness for the permanent solution tothe hardships of material existence. They are all after senseenjoyment, and to get a little facility for sense enjoyment they areattracted to worship empowered living entities known as demigods. Thisverse indicates that people are rarely interested in Krsnaconsciousness. They are mostly interested in material enjoyment, andtherefore they worship some powerful living entity.
TEXT 13
catur-varnyam maya srstam
guna-karma-vibhagasahtasya kartaram api mamviddhy akartaram avyayam
SYNONYMScatuh-varnyam--the four divisions of human society; maya--by Me;
srstam--created; guna--quality; karma--work; vibhagasah--in terms of
division; tasya--of that; kartaram--the father; api--although; mam--Me;
viddhi--you may know; akartaram--as the non-doer; avyayam--beingunchangeable.
TRANSLATIONAccording to the three modes of material nature and the work ascribed
to them, the four divisions of human society were created by Me. And,although I am the creator of this system, you should know that I am yetthe non-doer, being unchangeable.
PURPORTThe Lord is the creator of everything. Everything is born of Him,
everything is sustained by Him, and everything, after annihilation,rests in Him. He is therefore the creator of the four divisions of thesocial order, beginning with the intelligent class of men, technicallycalled brahmanas due to their being situated in the mode of goodness.Next is the administrative class, technically called the ksatriyas dueto their being situated in the mode of passion. The mercantile men,called the vaisyas, are situated in the mixed modes of passion andignorance, and the sudras, or laborer class, are situated in theignorant mode of material nature. In spite of His creating the fourdivisions of human society, Lord Krsna does not belong to any of thesedivisions, because He is not one of the conditioned souls, a section ofwhom form human society. Human society is similar to any other animalsociety, but to elevate men from the animal status, the above-mentioneddivisions are created by the Lord for the systematic development ofKrsna consciousness. The tendency of a particular man toward work isdetermined by the modes of material nature which he has acquired. Suchsymptoms of life, according to different modes of material nature, aredescribed in the Eighteenth Chapter of this book. A person in Krsnaconsciousness, however, is above even the brahmanas, because a brahmanaby quality is supposed to know about Brahman, the Supreme AbsoluteTruth. Most of them approach the impersonal Brahman manifestation ofLord Krsna, but only a man who transcends the limited knowledge of abrahmana and reaches the knowledge of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, Lord Sri Krsna, becomes a person in Krsna consciousness--or,in other words, a Vaisnava. Krsna consciousness includes knowledge ofall different plenary expansions of Krsna, namely Rama, Nrsimha,Varaha, etc. However, as Krsna is transcendental to this system of thefour divisions of human society, a person in Krsna consciousness isalso transcendental to all divisions of human society, whether weconsider the divisions of community, nation or species.
TEXT 14
na mam karmani limpanti
na me karma-phale sprhaiti mam yo 'bhijanatikarmabhir na sa badhyate
SYNONYMSna--never; mam--unto Me; karmani--all kinds of work; limpanti--do
affect; na--nor; me--My; karma-phale--in fruitive action; sprha--aspiration; iti--thus; mam--unto Me; yah--one who; abhijanati--does
know; karmabhih--by the reaction of such work; na--never does; sah--he;
badhyate--becomes entangled.
TRANSLATIONThere is no work that affects Me; nor do I aspire for the fruits of
action. One who understands this truth about Me also does not becomeentangled in the fruitive reactions of work.
PURPORTAs there are constitutional laws in the material world stating that the
king can do no wrong, or that the king is not subject to the statelaws, similarly the Lord, although He is the creator of this materialworld, is not affected by the activities of the material world. Hecreates and remains aloof from the creation, whereas the livingentities are entangled in the fruitive results of material activitiesbecause of their propensity for lording it over material resources. Theproprietor of an establishment is not responsible for the right andwrong activities of the workers, but the workers are themselvesresponsible. The living entities are engaged in their respectiveactivities of sense gratification, and these activities are notordained by the Lord. For advancement of sense gratification, theliving entities are engaged in the work of this world, and they aspireto heavenly happiness after death. The Lord, being full in Himself, hasno attraction for so-called heavenly happiness. The heavenly demigodsare only His engaged servants. The proprietor never desires the low-grade happiness such as the workers may desire. He is aloof from thematerial actions and reactions. For example, the rains are notresponsible for different types of vegetation that appear on the earth,although without such rains there is no possibility of vegetativegrowth. Vedic smrti confirms this fact as follows:
nimitta-matram evasau
srjyanam sarga-karmanipradhana-karani-bhutayato vai srjya-saktayah
"In the material creations, the Lord is only the supreme cause. The
immediate cause is material nature by which the cosmic manifestation isvisible." The created beings are of many varieties, such as thedemigods, human beings and lower animals, and all of them are subjectto the reactions of their past good or bad activities. The Lord onlygives them the proper facilities for such activities and theregulations of the modes of nature, but He is never responsible fortheir past and present activities. In the Vedanta-sutra (2.1.34) it isconfirmed, vaisamya-nairghrnye na sapeksatvat: the Lord is neverpartial to any living entity. The living entity is responsible for hisown acts. The Lord only gives him facilities, through the agency ofmaterial nature, the external energy. Anyone who is fully conversantwith all the intricacies of this law of karma, or fruitive activities,does not become affected by the results of his activities. In otherwords, the person who understands this transcendental nature of theLord is an experienced man in Krsna consciousness, and thus he is neversubjected to the laws of karma. One who does not know thetranscendental nature of the Lord and who thinks that the activities ofthe Lord are aimed at fruitive results, as are the activities of theordinary living entities, certainly becomes entangled himself in
fruitive reaction. One who knows the Supreme Truth is a liberated soul
fixed in Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 15
evam jnatva krtam karma
purvair api mumuksubhihkuru karmaiva tasmat tvampurvaih purvataram krtam
SYNONYMSevam--thus; jnatva--knowing well; krtam--performed; karma--work;
purvaih--by past authorities; api--although; mumuksubhih--who attainedliberation; kuru--just perform; karma--prescribed duty; eva--certainly;tasmat--therefore; tvam--you; purvaih--by the predecessors; purva-taram--ancient predecessors; krtam--as performed.
TRANSLATIONAll the liberated souls in ancient times acted with this understanding
and so attained liberation. Therefore, as the ancients, you shouldperform your duty in this divine consciousness.
PURPORTThere are two classes of men. Some of them are full of polluted
material things within their hearts, and some of them are materiallyfree. Krsna consciousness is equally beneficial for both of thesepersons. Those who are full of dirty things can take to the line ofKrsna consciousness for a gradual cleansing process, following theregulative principles of devotional service. Those who are alreadycleansed of the impurities may continue to act in the same Krsnaconsciousness so that others may follow their exemplary activities andthereby be benefited. Foolish persons or neophytes in Krsnaconsciousness often want to retire from activities without havingknowledge of Krsna consciousness. Arjuna's desire to retire fromactivities on the battlefield was not approved by the Lord. One needonly know how to act. To retire from the activities of Krsnaconsciousness and to sit aloof making a show of Krsna consciousness, isless important than actually engaging in the field of activities forthe sake of Krsna. Arjuna is here advised to act in Krsnaconsciousness, following in the footsteps of the Lord's previousdisciples, such as the sun-god Vivasvan, as mentioned hereinbefore. TheSupreme Lord knows all His past activities, as well as those of personswho acted in Krsna consciousness in the past. Therefore He recommendsthe acts of the sun-god, who learned this art from the Lord somemillions of years before. All such students of Lord Krsna are mentionedhere as past liberated persons, engaged in the discharge of dutiesallotted by Krsna.
TEXT 16
kim karma kim akarmeti
kavayo 'py atra mohitahtat te karma pravaksyamiyaj jnatva moksyase 'subhat
SYNONYMS
kim--what is; karma--action; kim--what is; akarma--inaction; iti--thus;
kavayah--the intelligent; api--also; atra--in this matter; mohitah--bewildered; tat--that; te--unto you; karma--work; pravaksyami--I shallexplain; yat--which; jnatva--knowing; moksyase--be liberated; asubhat--from ill fortune.
TRANSLATIONEven the intelligent are bewildered in determining what is action and
what is inaction. Now I shall explain to you what action is knowingwhich you shall be liberated from all sins.
PURPORTAction in Krsna consciousness has to be executed in accord with the
examples of previous bona fide devotees. This is recommended in the15th verse. Why such action should not be independent will be explainedin the text to follow.To act in Krsna consciousness, one has to follow the leadership ofauthorized persons who are in a line of disciplic succession asexplained in the beginning of this chapter. The system of Krsnaconsciousness was first narrated to the sun-god, the sun-god explainedit to his son Manu, Manu explained it to his son Iksvaku, and thesystem is current on this earth from that very remote time. Therefore,one has to follow in the footsteps of previous authorities in the lineof disciplic succession. Otherwise even the most intelligent men willbe bewildered regarding the standard actions of Krsna consciousness.For this reason, the Lord decided to instruct Arjuna in Krsnaconsciousness directly. Because of the direct instruction of the Lordto Arjuna, anyone who follows in the footsteps of Arjuna is certainlynot bewildered.It is said that one cannot ascertain the ways of religion simply byimperfect experimental knowledge. Actually the principles of religioncan only be laid down by the Lord Himself. Dharmam tu saksad bhagavat-pranitam (Bhag. 6.3.19). No one can manufacture a religious principleby imperfect speculation. One must follow in the footsteps of greatauthorities like Brahma, Siva, Narada, Manu, the Kumaras, Kapila,Prahlada, Bhisma, Sukadeva Gosvami, Yamaraja, Janaka, Bali Maharaja,etc. By mental speculation one cannot ascertain what is religion orself-realization. Therefore, out of causeless mercy to His devotees,the Lord explains directly to Arjuna what action is and what inactionis. Only action performed in Krsna consciousness can deliver a personfrom the entanglement of material existence.
TEXT 17
karmano hy api boddhavyam
boddhavyam ca vikarmanahakarmanas ca boddhavyamgahana karmano gatih
SYNONYMSkarmanah--working order; hi--certainly; api--also; boddhavyam--should
be understood; boddhavyam--to be understood; ca--also; vikarmanah--forbidden work; akarmanah--inaction; ca--also; boddhavyam--should be
understood; gahana--very difficult; karmanah--working order; gatih--to
enter in to.
TRANSLATIONThe intricacies of action are very hard to understand. Therefore one
should know properly what action is, what forbidden action is, and whatinaction is.
PURPORTIf one is serious about liberation from material bondage, one has to
understand the distinctions between action, inaction and unauthorizedactions. One has to apply oneself to such an analysis of action,reaction and perverted actions because it is a very difficult subjectmatter. To understand Krsna consciousness and action according to themodes, one has to learn one's relationship with the Supreme; i.e., onewho has learned perfectly knows that every living entity is the eternalservitor of the Lord and that consequently one has to act in Krsnaconsciousness. The entire Bhagavad-gita is directed toward thisconclusion. Any other conclusions, against this consciousness and itsattendant reactions, are vikarmas, or prohibited actions. To understandall this one has to associate with authorities in Krsna consciousnessand learn the secret from them; this is as good as learning from theLord directly. Otherwise, even the most intelligent person will bebewildered.
TEXT 18
karmany akarma yah pasyed
akarmani ca karma yahsa buddhiman manusyesusa yuktah krtsna-karma-krt
SYNONYMSkarmani--in action; akarma--inaction; yah--one who; pasyet--observes;
akarmani--in inaction; ca--also; karma--fruitive action; yah--one who;sah--he; buddhi-man--is intelligent; manusyesu--in human society; sah--he; yuktah--in the transcendental position; krtsna-karma-krt--althoughengaged in all activities.
TRANSLATIONOne who sees inaction in action, and action in inaction, is intelligent
among men, and he is in the transcendental position, although engagedin all sorts of activities.
PURPORTA person acting in Krsna consciousness is naturally free from the bonds
of karma. His activities are all performed for Krsna; therefore he doesnot enjoy or suffer any of the effects of work. Consequently he isintelligent in human society, even though he is engaged in all sorts ofactivities for Krsna. Akarma means without reaction to work. Theimpersonalist ceases fruitive activities out of fear, so that theresultant action may not be a stumbling block on the path of self-realization, but the personalist knows rightly his position as the
eternal servitor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore he
engages himself in the activities of Krsna consciousness. Becauseeverything is done for Krsna, he enjoys only transcendental happinessin the discharge of this service. Those who are engaged in this processare known to be without desire for personal sense gratification. Thesense of eternal servitorship to Krsna makes one immune to all sorts ofreactionary elements of work.
TEXT 19
yasya sarve samarambhah
kama-sankalpa-varjitahjnanagni-dagdha-karmanamtam ahuh panditam budhah
SYNONYMSyasya--one whose; sarve--all sorts of; samarambhah--in all attempts;
kama--desire for sense gratification; sankalpa--determination;varjitah--are devoid of; jnana--of perfect knowledge; agni--fire;dagdha--being burnt by; karmanam--the performer; tam--him; ahuh--declare; panditam--learned; budhah--of those who know.
TRANSLATIONOne is understood to be in full knowledge whose every act is devoid of
desire for sense gratification. He is said by sages to be a worker forwhose fruitive action is burned up by the fire of perfect knowledge.
PURPORTOnly a person in full knowledge can understand the activities of a
person in Krsna consciousness. Because the person in Krsnaconsciousness is devoid of all kinds of sense-gratificatorypropensities, it is to be understood that he has burned up thereactions of his work by perfect knowledge of his constitutionalposition as the eternal servitor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.He is actually learned who has attained to such perfection ofknowledge. Development of this knowledge of the eternal servitorship tothe Lord is compared to fire. Such a fire, once kindled, can burn upall kinds of reactions to work.
TEXT 20
tyaktva karma-phalasangam
nitya-trpto nirasrayahkarmany abhipravrtto 'pinaiva kincit karoti sah
SYNONYMStyaktva--having given up; karma-phala-asangam--attachment for fruitive
results; nitya--always; trptah--being satisfied; nirasrayah--withoutany shelter; karmani--in activity; abhipravrttah--being fully engaged;api--in spite of; na--does not; eva--certainly; kincit--anything;karoti--do; sah--he.
TRANSLATION
Abandoning all attachment to the results of his activities, ever
satisfied and independent, he performs no fruitive action, althoughengaged in all kinds of undertakings.
PURPORTThis freedom from the bondage of actions is possible only in Krsna
consciousness when one is doing everything for Krsna. A Krsna consciousperson acts out of pure love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead,and therefore he has no attraction for the results of the action. He isnot even attached to his personal maintenance, for everything is leftto Krsna. Nor is he anxious to secure things, nor to protect thingsalready in his possession. He does his duty to his best ability andleaves everything to Krsna. Such an unattached person is always freefrom the resultant reactions of good and bad; it is as though he werenot doing anything. This is the sign of akarma, or actions withoutfruitive reactions. Any other action, therefore, devoid of Krsnaconsciousness, is binding upon the worker, and that is the real aspectof vikarma, as explained hereinbefore.
TEXT 21
nirasir yata-cittatma
tyakta-sarva-parigrahahsariram kevalam karmakurvan napnoti kilbisam
SYNONYMSnirasih--without desire for the result; yata--controlled; citta-atma--
mind and intelligence; tyakta--giving up; sarva--all; parigrahah--senseof proprietorship over all possessions; sariram--in keeping body andsoul together; kevalam--only; karma--work; kurvan--doing so; na--never;apnoti--does acquire; kilbisam--sinful reactions.
TRANSLATIONSuch a man of understanding acts with mind and intelligence perfectly
controlled, gives up all sense of proprietorship over his possessionsand acts only for the bare necessities of life. Thus working, he is notaffected by sinful reactions.
PURPORTA Krsna conscious person does not expect good or bad results in his
activities. His mind and intelligence are fully controlled. He knowsthat because he is part and parcel of the Supreme and therefore thepart played by him, as a part and parcel of the whole, is not by hischoice but is chosen for him by the Supreme and is done only throughHis agency. When the hand moves, it does not move out of its ownaccord, but by the endeavor of the whole body. A Krsna conscious personis always dovetailed with the supreme desire, for he has no desire forpersonal sense gratification. He moves exactly like a part of amachine. As a machine part requires oiling and cleaning formaintenance, similarly, a Krsna conscious man maintains himself by hiswork just to remain fit for action in the transcendental loving serviceof the Lord. He is therefore immune to all the reactions of his
endeavors. Like an animal, he has no proprietorship even over his own
body. A cruel proprietor of an animal sometimes kills the animal in hispossession, yet the animal does not protest. Nor does it have any realindependence. A Krsna conscious person, fully engaged in self-realization, has very little time to falsely possess any materialobject. For maintaining body and soul, he does not require unfair meansof accumulating money. He does not, therefore, become contaminated bysuch material sins. He is free from all reactions to his actions.
TEXT 22
yadrccha-labha-santusto
dvandvatito vimatsarahsamah siddhav asiddhau cakrtvapi na nibadhyate
SYNONYMSyadrccha--out of its own accord; labha--gain; santustah--satisfied;
dvandva--duality; atitah--surpassed; vimatsarah--free from envy; samah--steady; siddhau--in success; asiddhau--failure; ca--also; krtva--doing; api--although; na--never; nibadhyate--is affected.
TRANSLATIONHe who is satisfied with gain which comes of its own accord, who is
free from duality and does not envy, who is steady both in success andfailure, is never entangled, although performing actions.
PURPORTA Krsna conscious person does not make much endeavor even to maintain
his body. He is satisfied with gains which are obtained of their ownaccord. He neither begs nor borrows, but he labors honestly as far asis in his power, and is satisfied with whatever is obtained by his ownhonest labor. He is therefore independent in his livelihood. He doesnot allow anyone's service to hamper his own service in Krsnaconsciousness. However, for the service of the Lord he can participatein any kind of action without being disturbed by the duality of thematerial world. The duality of the material world is felt in terms ofheat and cold, or misery and happiness. A Krsna conscious person isabove duality because he does not hesitate to act in any way for thesatisfaction of Krsna. Therefore he is steady both in success and infailure. These signs are visible when one is fully in transcendentalknowledge.
TEXT 23
gata-sangasya muktasya
jnanavasthita-cetasahyajnayacaratah karmasamagram praviliyate
SYNONYMSgata-sangasya--unattached to the modes of material nature; muktasya--of
the liberated; jnana-avasthita--situated in transcendence; cetasah--of
such wisdom; yajnaya--for the sake of Yajna (Krsna); acaratah--so
active; karma--work; samagram--in total; praviliyate--merges entirely.
TRANSLATIONThe work of a man who is unattached to the modes of material nature and
who is fully situated in transcendental knowledge merges entirely intotranscendence.
PURPORTBecoming fully Krsna conscious, one is freed from all dualities and
thus is free from the contaminations of the material modes. He canbecome liberated because he knows his constitutional position inrelationship with Krsna; and thus his mind cannot be drawn from Krsnaconsciousness. Consequently, whatever he does, he does for Krsna who isthe primeval Visnu. Therefore, all his works are technically sacrificesbecause sacrifice involves satisfying the Supreme Person, Krsna. Theresultant reactions to all such work certainly merge intotranscendence, and one does not suffer material effects.
TEXT 24
brahmarpanam brahma havir
brahmagnau brahmana hutambrahmaiva tena gantavyambrahma-karma-samadhina
SYNONYMSbrahma--spiritual in nature; arpanam--contribution; brahma--the
Supreme; havih--butter; brahma--spiritual; agnau--in the fire ofconsummation; brahmana--by the spirit soul; hutam--offered; brahma--spiritual kingdom; eva--certainly; tena--by him; gantavyam--to bereached; brahma--spiritual; karma--activities; samadhina--by completeabsorption.
TRANSLATIONA person who is fully absorbed in Krsna consciousness is sure to attain
the spiritual kingdom because of his full contribution to spiritualactivities, in which the consummation is absolute and that which isoffered is of the same spiritual nature.
PURPORTHow activities in Krsna consciousness can lead one ultimately to the
spiritual goal is described here. There are various activities in Krsnaconsciousness, and all of them will be described in the followingverses. But, for the present, just the principle of Krsna consciousnessis described. A conditioned soul, entangled in material contamination,is sure to act in the material atmosphere, and yet he has to get out ofsuch an environment. The process by which the conditioned soul can getout of the material atmosphere is Krsna consciousness. For example, apatient who is suffering from a disorder of the bowels due tooverindulgence in milk products is cured by another milk product,namely curds. The materially absorbed conditioned soul can be cured byKrsna consciousness as set forth here in the Gita. This process is
generally known as yajna, or activities (sacrifices) simply meant for
the satisfaction of Visnu, or Krsna. The more the activities of thematerial world are performed in Krsna consciousness, or for Visnu only,the more the atmosphere becomes spiritualized by complete absorption.Brahman means spiritual. The Lord is spiritual, and the rays of Histranscendental body are called brahmajyoti, His spiritual effulgence.Everything that exists is situated in that brahmajyoti, but when thejyoti is covered by illusion (maya) or sense gratification, it iscalled material. This material veil can be removed at once by Krsnaconsciousness; thus the offering for the sake of Krsna consciousness,the consuming agent of such an offering or contribution, the process ofconsumption, the contributor, and the result are--all combinedtogether--Brahman, or the Absolute Truth. The Absolute Truth covered bymaya is called matter. Matter dovetailed for the cause of the AbsoluteTruth regains its spiritual quality. Krsna consciousness is the processof converting the illusory consciousness into Brahman, or the Supreme.When the mind is fully absorbed in Krsna consciousness, it is said tobe in samadhi, or trance. Anything done in such transcendentalconsciousness is called yajna, or sacrifice for the Absolute. In thatcondition of spiritual consciousness, the contributor, thecontribution, the consumption, the performer or leader of theperformance, and the result or ultimate gain--everything--becomes onein the Absolute, the Supreme Brahman. That is the method of Krsnaconsciousness.
TEXT 25
daivam evapare yajnam
yoginah paryupasatebrahmagnav apare yajnamyajnenaivopajuhvati
SYNONYMSdaivam--in worshiping the demigods; eva--like this; apare--some;
yajnam--sacrifices; yoginah--the mystics; paryupasate--worshipperfectly; brahma--the Absolute Truth; agnau--in the fire of; apare--others; yajnam--sacrifice; yajnena--by sacrifice; eva--thus;upajuhvati--worship.
TRANSLATIONSome yogis perfectly worship the demigods by offering different
sacrifices to them, and some of them offer sacrifices in the fire ofthe Supreme Brahman.
PURPORTAs described above, a person engaged in discharging duties in Krsna
consciousness is also called a perfect yogi or a first-class mystic.But there are others also, who perform similar sacrifices in theworship of demigods, and still others who sacrifice to the SupremeBrahman, or the impersonal feature of the Supreme Lord. So there aredifferent kinds of sacrifices in terms of different categories. Suchdifferent categories of sacrifice by different types of performers onlysuperficially demark varieties of sacrifice. Factual sacrifice means tosatisfy the Supreme Lord, Visnu, who is also known as Yajna. All thedifferent varieties of sacrifice can be placed within two primary
divisions: namely, sacrifice of worldly possessions and sacrifice in
pursuit of transcendental knowledge. Those who are in Krsnaconsciousness sacrifice all material possessions for the satisfactionof the Supreme Lord, while others, who want some temporary materialhappiness, sacrifice their material possessions to satisfy demigodssuch as Indra, the sun-god, etc. And others, who are impersonalists,sacrifice their identity by merging into the existence of impersonalBrahman. The demigods are powerful living entities appointed by theSupreme Lord for the maintenance and supervision of all materialfunctions like the heating, watering and lighting of the universe.Those who are interested in material benefits worship the demigods byvarious sacrifices according to the Vedic rituals. They are calledbahv-isvara-vadi, or believers in many gods. But others, who worshipthe impersonal feature of the Absolute Truth and regard the forms ofthe demigods as temporary, sacrifice their individual selves in thesupreme fire and thus end their individual existences by merging intothe existence of the Supreme. Such impersonalists spend their time inphilosophical speculation to understand the transcendental nature ofthe Supreme. In other words, the fruitive workers sacrifice theirmaterial possessions for material enjoyment, whereas the impersonalistsacrifices his material designations with a view to merging into theexistence of the Supreme. For the impersonalist, the fire altar ofsacrifice is the Supreme Brahman, and the offering is the self beingconsumed by the fire of Brahman. The Krsna conscious person, likeArjuna, however, sacrifices everything for the satisfaction of Krsna,and thus all his material possessions as well as his own self--everything--is sacrificed for Krsna. Thus, he is the first-class yogi;but he does not lose his individual existence.
TEXT 26
srotradinindriyany anye
samyamagnisu juhvatisabdadin visayan anyaindriyagnisu juhvati
SYNONYMSsrotra-adini--hearing process; indriyani--senses; anye--others;
samyama--of restraint; agnisu--in the fire; juhvati--offers; sabda-adin--sound vibration, etc.; visayan--objects of sense gratification;anye--others; indriya--of sense organs; agnisu--in the fire; juhvati--sacrifice.
TRANSLATIONSome sacrifice the hearing process and the senses in the fire of the
controlled mind, and others sacrifice the objects of the senses, suchas sound, in the fire of the sacrifice.
PURPORTThe four divisions of human life, namely the brahmacari, the grhastha,
the vanaprastha, and the sannyasi, are all meant to become perfectyogis or transcendentalists. Since human life is not meant for ourenjoying sense gratification like the animals, the four orders of humanlife are so arranged that one may become perfect in spiritual life. Thebrahmacaris, or students under the care of a bona fide spiritual
master, control the mind by abstaining from sense gratification. They
are referred to in this verse as sacrificing the hearing process andthe senses in the fire of the controlled mind. A brahmacari hears onlywords concerning Krsna consciousness; hearing is the basic principlefor understanding, and therefore the pure brahmacari engages fully inharer namanukirtanam--chanting and hearing the glories of the Lord. Herestrains himself from the vibrations of material sounds, and hishearing is engaged in the transcendental sound vibration of Hare Krsna,Hare Krsna. Similarly, the householders, who have some license forsense gratification, perform such acts with great restraint. Sex life,intoxication and meat eating are general tendencies of human society,but a regulated householder does not indulge in unrestricted sex lifeand other sense gratification. Marriage on principles of religious lifeis therefore current in all civilized human society because that is theway for restricted sex life. This restricted, unattached sex life isalso a kind of yajna because the restricted householder sacrifices hisgeneral tendency toward sense gratification for higher transcendentallife.
TEXT 27
sarvanindriya-karmani
prana-karmani capareatma-samyama-yogagnaujuhvati jnana-dipite
SYNONYMSsarvani--all; indriya--senses; karmani--functions; prana-karmani--
functions of the life breath; ca--also; apare--others; atma-samyama--controlling the mind; yoga--linking process; agnau--in the fire of;juhvati--offers; jnana-dipite--because of the urge for self-realization.
TRANSLATIONThose who are interested in self-realization, in terms of mind and
sense control, offer the functions of all the senses, as well as thevital force [breath], as oblations into the fire of the controlledmind.
PURPORTThe yoga system conceived by Patanjali is referred to herein. In the
Yoga-sutra of Patanjali, the soul is called pratyag-atma and parag-atma. As long as the soul is attached to sense enjoyment, it is calledparag-atma. The soul is subjected to the functions of ten kinds of airat work within the body, and this is perceived through the breathingsystem. The Patanjali system of yoga instructs one on how to controlthe functions of the body's air in a technical manner so thatultimately all the functions of the air within become favorable forpurifying the soul of material attachment. According to this yogasystem, pratyag-atma is the ultimate goal. This pratyag-atma is awithdrawal from activities in matter. The senses interact with thesense objects, like the ear for hearing, eyes for seeing, nose forsmelling, tongue for tasting, hand for touching, and all of them arethus engaged in activities outside the self. They are called thefunctions of the prana-vayu. The apana-vayu goes downwards, vyana-vayu
acts to shrink and expand, samana-vayu adjusts equilibrium, udana-vayu
goes upwards--and when one is enlightened, one engages all these insearching for self-realization.
TEXT 28
dravya-yajnas tapo-yajna
yoga-yajnas tathaparesvadhyaya-jnana-yajnas cayatayah samsita-vratah
SYNONYMSdravya-yajnah--sacrificing one's possessions; tapah-yajnah--sacrifice
in austerities; yoga-yajnah--sacrifice in eightfold mysticism; tatha--thus; apare--others; svadhyaya--sacrifice in the study of the Vedas;jnana-yajnah--sacrifice in advancement of transcendental knowledge; ca--also; yatayah--enlightened; samsita--taken to strict; vratah--vows.
TRANSLATIONThere are others who, enlightened by sacrificing their material
possessions in severe austerities, take strict vows and practice theyoga of eightfold mysticism, and others study the Vedas for theadvancement of transcendental knowledge.
PURPORTThese sacrifices may be fitted into various divisions. There are
persons who are sacrificing their possessions in the form of variouskinds of charities. In India, the rich mercantile community or princelyorders open various kinds of charitable institutions like dharma-sala,anna-ksetra, atithi-sala, anathalaya, vidya-pitha, etc. In othercountries, too, there are many hospitals, old age homes and similarcharitable foundations meant for distributing food, education andmedical treatment free to the poor. All these charitable activities arecalled dravyamaya-yajna. There are others who, for higher elevation inlife or for promotion to higher planets within the universe,voluntarily accept many kinds of austerities such as candrayana andcaturmasya. These processes entail severe vows for conducting lifeunder certain rigid rules. For example, under the caturmasya vow thecandidate does not shave for four months during the year (July toOctober), he does not eat certain foods, does not eat twice in a dayand does not leave home. Such sacrifice of the comforts of life iscalled tapomaya-yajna. There are still others who engage themselves indifferent kinds of mystic yogas like the Patanjali system (for merginginto the existence of the Absolute), or hatha-yoga or astanga-yoga (forparticular perfections). And some travel to all the sanctified placesof pilgrimage. All these practices are called yoga-yajna, sacrifice fora certain type of perfection in the material world. There are otherswho engage themselves in the studies of different Vedic literatures,specifically the Upanisads and Vedanta-sutras, or the Sankhyaphilosophy. All of these are called svadhyaya-yajna. or engagement inthe sacrifice of studies. All these yogis are faithfully engaged indifferent types of sacrifice and are seeking a higher status of life.Krsna consciousness, is, however, different from these because it isthe direct service of the Supreme Lord. Krsna consciousness cannot beattained by any one of the above-mentioned types of sacrifices but can
be attained only by the mercy of the Lord and His bona fide devotee.
Therefore, Krsna consciousness is transcendental.
TEXT 29
apane juhvati pranam
prane 'panam tathaparepranapana-gati ruddhvapranayama-parayanahapare niyataharahpranan pranesu juhvati
SYNONYMSapane--air which acts downward; juhvati--offers; pranam--air which acts
outward; prane--in the air going outward; apanam--air going downward;tatha--as also; apare--others; prana--air going outward; apana--airgoing downward; gati--movement; ruddhva--checking; prana-ayama--tranceinduced by stopping all breathing; parayanah--so inclined; apare--others; niyata--controlled; aharah--eating; pranan--outgoing air;pranesu--in the outgoing air; juhvati--sacrifices.
TRANSLATIONAnd there are even others who are inclined to the process of breath
restraint to remain in trance, and they practice stopping the movementof the outgoing breath into the incoming, and incoming breath into theoutgoing, and thus at last remain in trance, stopping all breathing.Some of them, curtailing the eating process, offer the outgoing breathinto itself, as a sacrifice.
PURPORTThis system of yoga for controlling the breathing process is called
pranayama, and in the beginning it is practiced in the hatha-yogasystem through different sitting postures. All of these processes arerecommended for controlling the senses and for advancement in spiritualrealization. This practice involves controlling the air within the bodyto enable simultaneous passage in opposite directions. The apana airgoes downward, and the prana air goes up. The pranayama-yogi practicesbreathing the opposite way until the currents are neutralized intopuraka, equilibrium. Similarly, when the exhaled breathing is offeredto the inhaled breathing, it is called recaka. When both air currentsare completely stopped, it is called kumbhaka-yoga. By practice ofkumbhaka-yoga, the yogis increase the duration of life by many, manyyears. A Krsna conscious person, however, being always situated in thetranscendental loving service of the Lord, automatically becomes thecontroller of the senses. His senses, being always engaged in theservice of Krsna, have no chance of becoming otherwise engaged. So atthe end of life, he is naturally transferred to the transcendentalplane of Lord Krsna; consequently he makes no attempt to increase hislongevity. He is at once raised to the platform of liberation. A Krsnaconscious person begins from the transcendental stage, and he isconstantly in that consciousness. Therefore, there is no falling down,and ultimately he enters into the abode of the Lord without delay. Thepractice of reduced eating is automatically done when one eats onlykrsna-prasadam, or food which is offered first to the Lord. Reducingthe eating process is very helpful in the matter of sense control. And
without sense control there is no possibility of getting out of
material entanglement.
TEXT 30
sarve 'py ete yajna-vido
yajna-ksapita-kalmasahyajna-sistamrta-bhujoyanti brahma sanatanam
SYNONYMSsarve--all; api--although apparently different; ete--all these; yajna-
vidah--conversant with the purpose of performing; yajna--sacrifices;ksapita--being cleansed as the result of such performances; kalmasah--sinful reactions; yajna-sista--as a result of such performances ofyajna; amrta-bhujah--those who have tasted such nectar; yanti--doapproach; brahma--the supreme; sanatanam--eternal atmosphere.
TRANSLATIONAll these performers who know the meaning of sacrifice become cleansed
of sinful reaction, and, having tasted the nectar of the results ofsuch sacrifice, they go to the supreme eternal atmosphere.
PURPORTFrom the foregoing explanation of different types of sacrifice (namely
sacrifice of one's possessions, study of the Vedas or philosophicaldoctrines, and performance of the yoga system), it is found that thecommon aim of all is to control the senses. Sense gratification is theroot cause of material existence; therefore, unless and until one issituated on a platform apart from sense gratification, there is nochance of being elevated to the eternal platform of full knowledge,full bliss and full life. This platform is in the eternal atmosphere,or Brahman atmosphere. All the above-mentioned sacrifices help one tobecome cleansed of the sinful reactions of material existence. By thisadvancement in life, one not only becomes happy and opulent in thislife, but also, at the end, he enters into the eternal kingdom of God,either merging into the impersonal Brahman or associating with theSupreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna.
TEXT 31
nayam loko 'sty ayajnasya
kuto 'nyah kuru-sattama
SYNONYMSna--never; ayam--this; lokah--planet; asti--there is; ayajnasya--of the
foolish; kutah--where is; anyah--the other; kuru-sat-tama--O bestamongst the Kurus.
TRANSLATIONO best of the Kuru dynasty, without sacrifice one can never live
happily on this planet or in this life: what then of the next?
PURPORT
Whatever form of material existence one is in, one is invariably
ignorant of his real situation. In other words, existence in thematerial world is due to the multiple reactions to our sinful lives.Ignorance is the cause of sinful life, and sinful life is the cause ofone's dragging on in material existence. The human form of life is theonly loophole by which one may get out of this entanglement. The Vedas,therefore, give us a chance for escape by pointing out the paths ofreligion, economic comfort, regulated sense gratification and, at last,the means to get out of the miserable condition entirely. The path ofreligion, or the different kinds of sacrifice recommended above,automatically solves our economic problems. By performance of yajna wecan have enough food, enough milk, etc.--even if there is a so-calledincrease of population. When the body is fully supplied, naturally thenext stage is to satisfy the senses. The Vedas prescribe, therefore,sacred marriage for regulated sense gratification. Thereby one isgradually elevated to the platform of release from material bondage,and the highest perfection of liberation is to associate with theSupreme Lord. Perfection is achieved by performance of yajna(sacrifice), as described above. Now, if a person is not inclined toperform yajna according to the Vedas, how can he expect a happy life?There are different grades of material comforts in different heavenlyplanets, and in all cases there is immense happiness for personsengaged in different kinds of yajna. But the highest kind of happinessthat a man can achieve is to be promoted to the spiritual planets bypractice of Krsna consciousness. A life of Krsna consciousness istherefore the solution to all the problems of material existence.
TEXT 32
evam bahu-vidha yajna
vitata brahmano mukhekarma-jan viddhi tan sarvanevam jnatva vimoksyase
SYNONYMSevam--thus; bahu-vidhah--various kinds of; yajnah--sacrifices; vitatah-
-widespread; brahmanah--of the Vedas; mukhe--in the face of; karma-jan--born of work; viddhi--you should know; tan--then; sarvan--all; evam--thus; jnatva--knowing; vimoksyase--be liberated.
TRANSLATIONAll these different types of sacrifice are approved by the Vedas, and
all of them are born of different types of work. Knowing them as such,you will become liberated.
PURPORTDifferent types of sacrifice, as discussed above, are mentioned in the
Vedas to suit the different types of worker. Because men are so deeplyabsorbed in the bodily concept, these sacrifices are so arranged thatone can work either with the body, the mind, or the intelligence. Butall of them are recommended for ultimately bringing about liberationfrom the body. This is confirmed by the Lord herewith from His ownmouth.
TEXT 33
sreyan dravya-mayad yajnaj
jnana-yajnah parantapasarvam karmakhilam parthajnane parisamapyate
SYNONYMSsreyan--greater; dravya-mayat--than the sacrifice of material
possessions; yajnat--knowledge; jnana-yajnah--sacrifice in knowledge;parantapa--O chastiser of the enemy; sarvam--all; karma--activities;akhilam--in totality; partha--O son of Prtha; jnane--in knowledge;parisamapyate--ends in.
TRANSLATIONO chastiser of the enemy, the sacrifice of knowledge is greater than
the sacrifice of material possessions. O son of Prtha, after all, thesacrifice of work culminates in transcendental knowledge.
PURPORTThe purpose of all sacrifices is to arrive at the status of complete
knowledge, then to gain release from material miseries, and,ultimately, to engage in loving transcendental service to the SupremeLord (Krsna consciousness). Nonetheless, there is a mystery about allthese different activities of sacrifice, and one should know thismystery. Sacrifices sometimes take different forms according to theparticular faith of the performer. When one's faith reaches the stageof transcendental knowledge, the performer of sacrifices should beconsidered more advanced than those who simply sacrifice materialpossessions without such knowledge, for without attainment ofknowledge, sacrifices remain on the material platform and bestow nospiritual benefit. Real knowledge culminates in Krsna consciousness,the highest stage of transcendental knowledge. Without the elevation ofknowledge, sacrifices are simply material activities. When, however,they are elevated to the level of transcendental knowledge, all suchactivities enter onto the spiritual platform. Depending on differencesin consciousness, sacrificial activities are sometimes called karma-kanda, fruitive activities, and sometimes jnana-kanda, knowledge in thepursuit of truth. It is better when the end is knowledge.
TEXT 34
tad viddhi pranipatena
pariprasnena sevayaupadeksyanti te jnanamjnaninas tattva-darsinah
SYNONYMStat--that knowledge of different sacrifices; viddhi--try to understand;
pranipatena--by approaching a spiritual master; pariprasnena--bysubmissive inquiries; sevaya--by the rendering of service;upadeksyanti--initiate; te--unto you; jnanam--knowledge; jnaninah--theself-realized; tattva--truth; darsinah--the seers.
TRANSLATION
Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire
from him submissively and render service unto him. The self-realizedsoul can impart knowledge unto you because he has seen the truth.
PURPORTThe path of spiritual realization is undoubtedly difficult. The Lord
therefore advises us to approach a bona fide spiritual master in theline of disciplic succession from the Lord Himself. No one can be abona fide spiritual master without following this principle ofdisciplic succession. The Lord is the original spiritual master, and aperson in the disciplic succession can convey the message of the Lordas it is to his disciple. No one can be spiritually realized bymanufacturing his own process, as is the fashion of the foolishpretenders. The Bhagavatam (6.3.19) says, dharmam tu saksad bhagavat-pranitam--the path of religion is directly enunciated by the Lord.Therefore, mental speculation or dry arguments cannot help one progressin spiritual life. One has to approach a bona fide spiritual master toreceive the knowledge. Such a spiritual master should be accepted infull surrender, and one should serve the spiritual master like a menialservant, without false prestige. Satisfaction of the self-realizedspiritual master is the secret of advancement in spiritual life.Inquiries and submission constitute the proper combination forspiritual understanding. Unless there is submission and service,inquiries from the learned spiritual master will not be effective. Onemust be able to pass the test of the spiritual master, and when he seesthe genuine desire of the disciple, he automatically blesses thedisciple with genuine spiritual understanding. In this verse, bothblind following and absurd inquiries are condemned. One should not onlyhear submissively from the spiritual master, but one must also get aclear understanding from him, in submission and service and inquiries.A bona fide spiritual master is by nature very kind toward thedisciple. Therefore when the student is submissive and is always readyto render service, the reciprocation of knowledge and inquiries becomesperfect.
TEXT 35
yaj jnatva na punar moham
evam yasyasi pandavayena bhutany asesanidraksyasy atmany atho mayi
SYNONYMSyat--which; jnatva--knowing; na--never; punah--again; moham--illusion;
evam--like this; yasyasi--you shall go; pandava--O son of Pandu; yena--by which; bhutani--all living entities; asesani--totally; draksyasi--you will see; atmani--in the Supreme Soul; atho--or in other words;mayi--in Me.
TRANSLATIONAnd when you have thus learned the truth, you will know that all living
beings are but part of Me--and that they are in Me, and are Mine.
PURPORT
The result of receiving knowledge from a self-realized soul, or one who
knows things as they are, is learning that all living beings are partsand parcels of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Sri Krsna. Thesense of a separated existence from Krsna is called maya (ma--not, ya--this). Some think that we have nothing to do with Krsna, that Krsna isonly a great historical personality and that the Absolute is theimpersonal Brahman. Factually, as it is stated in the Bhagavad-gita,this impersonal Brahman is the personal effulgence of Krsna. Krsna, asthe Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the cause of everything. In theBrahma-samhita it is clearly stated that Krsna is the SupremePersonality of Godhead, the cause of all causes. Even the millions ofincarnations are only His different expansions. Similarly, the livingentities are also expansions of Krsna. The Mayavadi philosopherswrongly think that Krsna loses His own separate existence in His manyexpansions. This thought is material in nature. We have experience inthe material world that a thing, when fragmentally distributed, losesits own original identity. But the Mayavadi philosophers fail tounderstand that absolute means that one plus one is equal to one, andthat one minus one is also equal to one. This is the case in theabsolute world.For want of sufficient knowledge in the absolute science, we are nowcovered with illusion, and therefore we think that we are separate fromKrsna. Although we are separated parts of Krsna, we are neverthelessnot different from Him. The bodily difference of the living entities ismaya, or not actual fact. We are all meant to satisfy Krsna. By mayaalone Arjuna thought that the temporary bodily relationship with hiskinsmen was more important than his eternal spiritual relationship withKrsna. The whole teaching of the Gita is targeted toward this end: thata living being, as His eternal servitor, cannot be separated fromKrsna, and his sense of being an identity apart from Krsna is calledmaya. The living entities, as separate parts and parcels of theSupreme, have a purpose to fulfill. Having forgotten that purpose,since time immemorial, they are situated in different bodies, as men,animals, demigods, etc. Such bodily differences arise fromforgetfulness of the transcendental service of the Lord. But when oneis engaged in transcendental service through Krsna consciousness, onebecomes at once liberated from this illusion. One can acquire such pureknowledge only from the bona fide spiritual master and thereby avoidthe delusion that the living entity is equal to Krsna. Perfectknowledge is that the Supreme Soul, Krsna, is the supreme shelter forall living entities, and giving up such shelter, the living entitiesare deluded by the material energy, imagining themselves to have aseparate identity. Thus, under different standards of materialidentity, they become forgetful of Krsna. When, however, such deludedliving entities become situated in Krsna consciousness, it is to beunderstood that they are on the path of liberation, as confirmed in theBhagavatam (2.10.6): muktir hitvanyatha-rupam svarupena vyavasthitih.Liberation means to be situated in one's constitutional position as theeternal servitor of Krsna (Krsna consciousness).
TEXT 36
api ced asi papebhyah
sarvebhyah papa-krt-tamahsarvam jnana-plavenaiva
vrjinam santarisyasi
SYNONYMSapi--even; cet--if; asi--you are; papebhyah--of sinners; sarvebhyah--of
all; papa-krt-tamah--the greatest sinner; sarvam--all such sinfulactions; jnana-plavena--by the boat of transcendental knowledge; eva--certainly; vrjinam--the ocean of miseries; santarisyasi--you will crosscompletely.
TRANSLATIONEven if you are considered to be the most sinful of all sinners, when
you are situated in the boat of transcendental knowledge, you will beable to cross over the ocean of miseries.
PURPORTProper understanding of one's constitutional position in relationship
to Krsna is so nice that it can at once lift one from the struggle forexistence which goes on in the ocean of nescience. This material worldis sometimes regarded as an ocean of nescience and sometimes as ablazing forest. In the ocean, however expert a swimmer one may be, thestruggle for existence is very severe. If someone comes forward andlifts the struggling swimmer from the ocean, he is the greatest savior.Perfect knowledge, received from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, isthe path of liberation. The boat of Krsna consciousness is very simple,but at the same time the most sublime.
TEXT 37
yathaidhamsi samiddho 'gnir
bhasma-sat kurute 'rjunajnanagnih sarva-karmanibhasma-sat kurute tatha
SYNONYMSyatha--just as; edhamsi--firewood; samiddhah--blazing; agnih--fire;
bhasma-sat--turns into ashes; kurute--so does; arjuna--O Arjuna; jnana-agnih--the fire of knowledge; sarva-karmani--all reactions to materialactivities; bhasma-sat--to ashes; kurute--it so does; tatha--similarly.
TRANSLATIONAs a blazing fire turns firewood to ashes, O Arjuna, so does the fire
of knowledge burn to ashes all reactions to material activities.
PURPORTPerfect knowledge of self and Superself and of their relationship is
compared herein to fire. This fire not only burns up all reactions toimpious activities, but also all reactions to pious activities, turningthem to ashes. There are many stages of reaction: reaction in themaking, reaction fructifying, reaction already achieved, and reaction apriori. But knowledge of the constitutional position of the livingentity burns everything to ashes. When one is in complete knowledge,all reactions, both a priori and a posteriori, are consumed. In the
Vedas (Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 4.4.22) it is stated, ubhe uhaivaisa ete
taraty amrtah sadhv-asadhuni: "One overcomes both the pious and impiousreactions of work."
TEXT 38
na hi jnanena sadrsam
pavitram iha vidyatetat svayam yoga-samsiddhahkalenatmani vindati
SYNONYMSna--never; hi--certainly; jnanena--with knowledge; sadrsam--in
comparison; pavitram--sanctified; iha--in this world; vidyate--exists;tat--that; svayam--himself; yoga--in devotion; samsiddhah--matured;kalena--in course of time; atmani--in himself; vindati--enjoys.
TRANSLATIONIn this world, there is nothing so sublime and pure as transcendental
knowledge. Such knowledge is the mature fruit of all mysticism. And onewho has achieved this enjoys the self with himself in due course oftime.
PURPORTWhen we speak of transcendental knowledge, we do so in terms of
spiritual understanding. As such, there is nothing so sublime and pureas transcendental knowledge. Ignorance is the cause of our bondage, andknowledge is the cause of our liberation. This knowledge is the maturefruit of devotional service, and when one is situated in transcendentalknowledge, he need not search for peace elsewhere, for he enjoys peacewithin himself. In other words, this knowledge and peace culminate inKrsna consciousness. That is the last word in the Bhagavad-gita.
TEXT 39
sraddhaval labhate jnanam
tat-parah samyatendriyahjnanam labdhva param santimacirenadhigacchati
SYNONYMSsraddha-van--a faithful man; labhate--achieves; jnanam--knowledge; tat-
parah--very much attached to it; samyata--controlled; indriyah--senses;jnanam--knowledge; labdhva--having achieved; param--transcendental;santim--peace; acirena--very soon; adhigacchati--attains.
TRANSLATIONA faithful man who is absorbed in transcendental knowledge and who
subdues his senses quickly attains the supreme spiritual peace.
PURPORT
Such knowledge in Krsna consciousness can be achieved by a faithful
person who believes firmly in Krsna. One is called a faithful man whothinks that, simply by acting in Krsna consciousness, he can attain thehighest perfection. This faith is attained by the discharge ofdevotional service, and by chanting Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, KrsnaKrsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, whichcleanses one's heart of all material dirt. Over and above this, oneshould control the senses. A person who is faithful to Krsna and whocontrols the senses can easily attain perfection in the knowledge ofKrsna consciousness without delay.
TEXT 40
ajnas casraddadhanas ca
samsayatma vinasyatinayam loko 'sti na parona sukham samsayatmanah
SYNONYMSajnah--fools who have no knowledge in standard scriptures; ca--and;
asraddadhanah--without faith in revealed scriptures; ca--also; samsaya--doubts; atma--a person; vinasyati--falls back; na--never; ayam--this;lokah--world; asti--there is; na--neither; parah--next life; na--not;sukham--happiness; samsaya--doubtful; atmanah--of the person.
TRANSLATIONBut ignorant and faithless persons who doubt the revealed scriptures do
not attain God consciousness. For the doubting soul there is happinessneither in this world nor in the next.
PURPORTOut of many standard and authoritative revealed scriptures, the
Bhagavad-gita is the best. Persons who are almost like animals have nofaith in, or knowledge of the standard revealed scriptures; and some,even though they have knowledge of, or can cite passages from, therevealed scriptures, have actually no faith in these words. And eventhough others may have faith in scriptures like Bhagavad-gita, they donot believe in or worship the Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna. Suchpersons cannot have any standing in Krsna consciousness. They falldown. Out of all the above-mentioned persons, those who have no faithand are always doubtful make no progress at all. Men without faith inGod and His revealed word find no good in this world, nor in the next.For them there is no happiness whatsoever. One should therefore followthe principles of revealed scriptures with faith and thereby be raisedto the platform of knowledge. Only this knowledge will help one becomepromoted to the transcendental platform of spiritual understanding. Inother words, doubtful persons have no status whatsoever in spiritualemancipation. One should therefore follow in the footsteps of greatacaryas who are in the disciplic succession and thereby attain success.
TEXT 41
yoga-sannyasta-karmanam
jnana-sanchinna-samsayamatmavantam na karmani
nibadhnanti dhananjaya
SYNONYMSyoga--devotional service in karma-yoga; sannyasta--renounced; karmanam-
-of the performers; jnana--knowledge; sanchinna--cut by the advancementof knowledge; samsayam--doubts; atma-vantam--situated in the self; na--never; karmani--work; nibadhnanti--do bind up; dhananjaya--O conquerorof riches.
TRANSLATIONTherefore, one who has renounced the fruits of his action, whose doubts
are destroyed by transcendental knowledge, and who is situated firmlyin the self, is not bound by works, O conqueror of riches.
PURPORTOne who follows the instruction of the Gita, as it is imparted by the
Lord, the Personality of Godhead Himself, becomes free from all doubtsby the grace of transcendental knowledge. He, as a part and parcel ofthe Lord, in full Krsna consciousness, is already established in self-knowledge. As such, he is undoubtedly above bondage to action.
TEXT 42
tasmad ajnana-sambhutam
hrt-stham jnanasinatmanahchittvainam samsayam yogamatisthottistha bharata
SYNONYMStasmat--therefore; ajnana-sambhutam--outcome of ignorance; hrt-stham--
situated in the heart; jnana--knowledge; asina--by the weapon of;atmanah--of the self; chittva--cutting off; enam--this; samsayam--doubt; yogam--in yoga; atistha--be situated; uttistha--stand up tofight; bharata--O descendant of Bharata.
TRANSLATIONTherefore the doubts which have arisen in your heart out of ignorance
should be slashed by the weapon of knowledge. Armed with yoga, OBharata, stand and fight.
PURPORTThe yoga system instructed in this chapter is called sanatana-yoga, or
eternal activities performed by the living entity. This yoga has twodivisions of sacrificial actions: one is called sacrifice of one'smaterial possessions, and the other is called knowledge of self, whichis pure spiritual activity. If sacrifice of one's material possessionsis not dovetailed for spiritual realization, then such sacrificebecomes material. But one who performs such sacrifices with a spiritualobjective, or in devotional service, makes a perfect sacrifice. When wecome to spiritual activities, we find that these are also divided intotwo: namely, understanding of one's own self (or one's constitutionalposition), and the truth regarding the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
