9/21/2018 Bhagavad gita chapter-17 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/897896 1/12Name: ___________________________________________ Date: ___________________
Bhagavad gita chapter-17
1. This doubt of Arjuna’s is to be cleared by K ṛṣṇ a.BG 17.1
Are those who create some sort of God by selecting a human being and placing their
faith in him worshiping in goodness, passion or ignorance? Do such persons attain the
perfectional stage of life? Is it possible for them to be situated in real knowledge and
elevate themselves to the highest perfectional stage? Do those who do not follow the
rules and regulations of the scriptures but who have faith in something and worship
gods and demigods and men attain success in their effort? Arjuna is putting these
questions to K ṛṣṇ a.
2. How one acquire a nature which is of a speciﬁc quality? Bg 17.2
According to their previous activities in the mode of goodness, passion or ignorance,
they acquire a nature which is of a speciﬁc quality.
3. How a living entity is in contact with material nature? BG 17.2
since the living entity is in contact with material nature, he acquires different types of
mentality according to his association with the material modes.
4. How one can change his position with the help of spiritual master? Bg 17.2
But this nature can be changed if one associates with a bona ﬁde spiritual master and
abides by his rules and the scriptures. Gradually, one can change his position from
ignorance to goodness, or from passion to goodness.
5. How one can change his position to a higher mode of nature? BG 17.2
The conclusion is that blind faith in a particular mode of nature cannot help a person
become elevated to the perfectional stage. One has to consider things carefully, with
intelligence, in the association of a bona ﬁde spiritual master. Thus one can change his
position to a higher mode of nature.
6. How Everyone has a particular type of faith? Bg 17.3
Everyone has a particular type of faith, regardless of what he is. But his faith is
considered good, passionate or ignorant according to the nature he has acquired. Thus,
according to his particular type of faith, one associates with certain persons.
7. What is the only path back without fear? BG 17.3
Although one may be conducted by some impression, or some conception of life,
originally he is nirgu ṇ a, or transcendental. Therefore one has to become cleansed of
the material contamination that he has acquired, in order to regain his relationship
with the Supreme Lord. That is the only path back without fear: K ṛṣṇ a consciousness.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad gita chapter-17 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/897896 2/128. How a person is surely to be conducted by the inﬂuence of the modes of nature? BG 17.3
If one is situated in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness, then that path is guaranteed for his elevation
to the perfectional stage. If one does not take to this path of self-realization, then he is
surely to be conducted by the inﬂuence of the modes of nature.
9. Why The word śraddhā, or “faith,” is very signiﬁcant ? BG 17.3
Śraddhā, or faith, originally comes out of the mode of goodness. One’s faith may be in a
demigod or some created God or some mental concoction. One’s strong faith is
supposed to be productive of works of material goodness. But in material conditional
life, no works are completely puriﬁed. They are mixed. They are not in pure goodness.
Pure goodness is transcendental
10. How one’s faith is established? BG 17.3
As long as one’s faith is not completely in puriﬁed goodness, the faith is subject to
contamination by any of the modes of material nature. The contaminated modes of
material nature expand to the heart. Therefore according to the position of the heart in
contact with a particular mode of material nature, one’s faith is established.
11. How we ﬁnd different types of faith in this world? BG 17.3
It should be understood that if one’s heart is in the mode of goodness his faith is also in
the mode of goodness. If his heart is in the mode of passion, his faith is also in the
mode of passion. And if his heart is in the mode of darkness, illusion, his faith is also
thus contaminated. Thus we ﬁnd different types of faith in this world,
12. Why different types of faith, there are different kinds of worship? BG 17.3
Thus we ﬁnd different types of faith in this world, and there are different types of
religions due to different types of faith. The real principle of religious faith is situated
in the mode of pure goodness, but because the heart is tainted we ﬁnd different types
of religious principles. Thus according to different types of faith, there are different
kinds of worship.
13. According to scriptural injunction who is worshipable? BG 17.4
According to scriptural injunction, only the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
worshipable,
14. Those who are situated in goodness Whom they worship? Bg 17.4
Those who are situated in goodness generally worship the demigods. The demigods
include Brahmā, Śiva and others such as Indra, Candra and the sun-god. There are
various demigods. Those in goodness worship a particular demigod for a particular
purpose.
15. those who are in the mode of passion whom they worship? BG 17.4
They worship the demons. We recall that during the Second World War a man in
Calcutta worshiped Hitler because thanks to that war he had amassed a large amount of
wealth by dealing in the black market. Similarly, those in the modes of passion and
ignorance generally select a powerful man to be God. They think that anyone can be
worshiped as God and that the same results will be obtained.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad gita chapter-17 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/897896 3/1216. those who are in the mode of ignorance whom they will worship? BG 17.4
They worship dead spirits. Sometimes people worship at the tomb of some dead man.
Sexual service is also considered to be in the mode of darkness. Similarly, in remote
villages in India there are worshipers of ghosts. We have seen that in India the lower-
class people sometimes go to the forest, and if they have knowledge that a ghost lives
in a tree, they worship that tree and offer sacriﬁces.
17. To Whom The impersonalists worship? BG 17.4
The impersonalists are supposed to be situated in the mode of goodness, and they
worship ﬁve kinds of demigods.
18. according to Bhagavad-gītā who is demonic? BG 17.5-6
There are persons who manufacture modes of austerity and penance which are not
mentioned in the scriptural injunctions. For instance, fasting for some ulterior purpose,
such as to promote a purely political end, is not mentioned in the scriptural directions.
The scriptures recommend fasting for spiritual advancement, not for some political end
or social purpose. Persons who take to such austerities are, according to Bhagavad-gītā,
certainly demoniac.
19. What is not mentioned in the Vedic literature? BG 17.5-6
Such unauthorized fasting or austerities for some political end are certainly very
disturbing to others. They are not mentioned in the Vedic literature.
20. What kind of demonstrations are insults to the Supreme Personality of Godhead? BG 17.5-6
sometimes one dies by political fasting Such demonstrations are insults to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead because they are enacted in disobedience to the Vedic
scriptural injunctions.
21. Why The word acetasa ḥ is signiﬁcant? BG 17.5-6
The word acetasa ḥ is signiﬁcant in this connection. Persons of normal mental condition
must obey the scriptural injunctions. Those who are not in such a position neglect and
disobey the scriptures and manufacture their own way of austerities and penances.
22. How demonic person achieve the supreme goal? BG 17.5-6
The Lord forces demonic to take birth in the wombs of demoniac persons. Consequently
they will live by demoniac principles life after life without knowing their relationship
with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If, however, such persons are fortunate
enough to be guided by a spiritual master who can direct them to the path of Vedic
wisdom, they can get out of this entanglement and ultimately achieve the supreme
goal.
23. Who are actually wise? BG 17.7
Those who can understand analytically what kind of performances are in what modes of
material nature are actually wise
9/21/2018 Bhagavad gita chapter-17 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/897896 4/1224. What kind of people are foolish? BG 17.7
those who consider all kinds of sacriﬁce or food or charity to be the same cannot
discriminate, and they are foolish
25. What kind of food the mode of goodness people eat? Bg 17.8
Foods dear to those in the mode of goodness increase the duration of life, purify one’s
existence and give strength, health, happiness and satisfaction. Such foods are juicy,
fatty, wholesome, and pleasing to the heart.
26. Whaty kind of food the mode of passion people will eat? BG 17.9
Foods that are too bitter, too sour, salty, hot, pungent, dry and burning are dear to
those in the mode of passion. Such foods cause distress, misery and disease.
27. What kind of food the mode of darkness people will eat? Bg 17.10
Food prepared more than three hours before being eaten, food that is tasteless,
decomposed and putrid, and food consisting of remnants and untouchable things is dear
to those in the mode of darkness.
28. What is The purpose of eating food? BG 17.10
The purpose of food is to increase the duration of life, purify the mind and aid bodily
strength. This is its only purpose.
29. What is known as Remnants of food? Bg 17.10
Remnants of food may be eaten only when they are part of a meal that was ﬁrst offered
to the Supreme Lord or ﬁrst eaten by saintly persons, especially the spiritual master.
30. What Supreme Personality of Godhead accepts? BG 17.10
In Bhagavad-gītā the Supreme Lord says that He accepts preparations of vegetables,
ﬂour and milk when offered with devotion. Patra ṁ pu ṣ pa ṁ phala ṁ toyam. Of course,
devotion and love are the chief things which the Supreme Personality of Godhead
accepts.
31. Why one should offer food to the Supreme Personality of Godhead? Bg 17.10
It is mentioned that the prasādam should be prepared in a particular way. Any food
prepared by the injunctions of the scripture and offered to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead can be taken even if prepared long, long ago, because such food is
transcendental. Therefore to make food antiseptic, eatable and palatable for all
persons, one should offer food to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
32. Why sacriﬁce should be done as a matter of duty? BG 17.11
The general tendency is to offer sacriﬁce with some purpose in mind, but here it is
stated that sacriﬁce should be performed without any such desire. It should be done as
a matter of duty.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad gita chapter-17 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/897896 5/1233. What is not their in the mode of goodness? BG 17.11
the performance of rituals in temples or in churches. Generally they are performed
with the purpose of material beneﬁt, but that is not in the mode of goodness.
34. How one should go to a temple or church? BG 17.11
One should go to a temple or church as a matter of duty, offer respect to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and offer ﬂowers and eatables without any purpose of obtaining
material beneﬁt.
35. Why Everyone thinks that there is no use in going to the temple just to worship God? BG 17.11
Everyone thinks that there is no use in going to the temple just to worship God. But
worship for economic beneﬁt is not recommended in the scriptural injunctions.
36. What is the duty of every civilized man regarding visiting temple? BG 17.11
One should go simply to offer respect to the Deity. That will place one in the mode of
goodness. It is the duty of every civilized man to obey the injunctions of the scriptures
and offer respect to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
37. What kind of sacriﬁces and rituals are considered to be in the mode of passion? BG 17.12
Sometimes sacriﬁces and rituals are performed for elevation to the heavenly kingdom
or for some material beneﬁts in this world. Such sacriﬁces or ritualistic performances
are considered to be in the mode of passion.
38. What is Faith in the mode of darkness or ignorance is? Bg 17.13
Faith in the mode of darkness or ignorance is actually faithlessness.
39. What will produce a demoniac mentality and do not beneﬁt human society? BG 17.13
Sometimes people worship some demigod just to make money and then spend the
money for recreation, ignoring the scriptural injunctions. Such ceremonial shows of
religiosity are not accepted as genuine. They are all in the mode of darkness; they
produce a demoniac mentality and do not beneﬁt human society.
40. What is the austerities and penances practiced by the body? BG 17.14
One should offer, or learn to offer, respect to God or to the demigods, the perfect,
qualiﬁed brāhma ṇ as and the spiritual master and superiors like father, mother or any
person who is conversant with Vedic knowledge. These should be given proper respect.
41. How one should practice cleansing ? BG 17.14
One should practice cleansing oneself externally and internally, and he should learn to
become simple in behavior. He should not do anything which is not sanctioned by the
scriptural injunctions. He should not indulge in sex outside of married life, for sex is
sanctioned in the scripture only in marriage, not otherwise. This is called celibacy.
These are penances and austerities as far as the body is concerned.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad gita chapter-17 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/897896 6/1242. What is penance as far as talking is concerned? BG 17.15
One should not speak in such a way as to agitate the minds of others. Of course, when a
teacher speaks, he can speak the truth for the instruction of his students, but such a
teacher should not speak to those who are not his students if he will agitate their
minds. This is penance as far as talking is concerned.
43. Why one should not talk nonsense ? BG 17.15
one should not talk nonsense. The process of speaking in spiritual circles is to say
something upheld by the scriptures.
44. What is called penance of speech? BG 17.15
One should at once quote from scriptural authority to back up what he is saying. At the
same time, such talk should be very pleasurable to the ear. By such discussions, one
may derive the highest beneﬁt and elevate human society. There is a limitless stock of
Vedic literature, and one should study this. This is called penance of speech.
45. How to make the mind austere? BG 17.16
To make the mind austere is to detach it from sense gratiﬁcation. It should be so
trained that it can be always thinking of doing good for others.
46. What is the best training for the mind? BG 17.16
The best training for the mind is gravity in thought. One should not deviate from K ṛṣṇ a
consciousness and must always avoid sense gratiﬁcation. To purify one’s nature is to
become K ṛṣṇ a conscious.
47. How the Satisfaction of the mind can be obtained? BG 17.16
Satisfaction of the mind can be obtained only by taking the mind away from thoughts of
sense enjoyment. The more we think of sense enjoyment, the more the mind becomes
dissatisﬁed.
48. Why in the present age no possibility of the mind’s becoming satisﬁed? BG 17.16
In the present age we unnecessarily engage the mind in so many different ways for
sense gratiﬁcation, and so there is no possibility of the mind’s becoming satisﬁed.
49. What is the best course is to divert the mind? BG 17.16
The best course is to divert the mind to the Vedic literature, which is full of satisfying
stories, as in the Purā ṇ as and the Mahābhārata. One can take advantage of this
knowledge and thus become puriﬁed.
50. How one can purify his existence? BG 17.16
The person in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness observes perfect silence in this sense. Control of the
mind means detaching the mind from sense enjoyment. One should be straightforward
in his dealings and thereby purify his existence.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad gita chapter-17 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/897896 7/1251. What is called austerity in goodness? Bg 17.17
This threefold austerity, performed with transcendental faith by men not expecting
material beneﬁts but engaged only for the sake of the Supreme, is called austerity in
goodness.
52. Why penance and austerity are executed? BG 17.18
Sometimes penance and austerity are executed to attract people and receive honor
53. How penance and austerity are performed? BG 17.18
Penance and austerity are perfomed to receive honor, respect and worship from others.
Persons in the mode of passion arrange to be worshiped by subordinates and let them
wash their feet and offer riches.
54. What is considered to be in the mode of passion? BG 17.18
arrangements artiﬁcially made by the performance of penances are considered to be in
the mode of passion.
55. What is the result of penance and austerity ? BG 17.18
The results are temporary; they can be continued for some time, but they are not
permanent
56. Give an instances of foolish penance undertaken by demons? BG 17.19
There are instances of foolish penance undertaken by demons like Hira ṇ yakaśipu, who
performed austere penances to become immortal and kill the demigods.
57. Whom Hira ṇ yakaśipu preyed? BG 17.19
prayed to Brahmā for such things
58. By whom Hira ṇ yakaśipu was killed by? BG 17.19
ultimately he was killed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
59. What is in the mode of ignorance? BG 17.19
To undergo penances for something which is impossible is certainly in the mode of
ignorance.
60. What is considered to be in the mode of goodness? BG 17.20
Charity given out of duty, without expectation of return, at the proper time and place,
and to a worthy person is considered to be in the mode of goodness.
61. What is said about charity in Vedic literature? BG 17.20
In the Vedic literature, charity given to a person engaged in spiritual activities is
recommended.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad gita chapter-17 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/897896 8/1262. Why Spiritual perfection is always a consideration in giving charity? BG 17.20
Spiritual perfection is always a consideration. Therefore charity is recommended to be
given at a place of pilgrimage and at lunar or solar eclipses or at the end of the month
or to a qualiﬁed brāhma ṇ a or a Vai ṣṇ ava (devotee) or in temples. Such charities should
be given without any consideration of return.
63. What is not recommended in the Vedic literature? BG 17.20
Charity to the poor is sometimes given out of compassion, but if a poor man is not
worth giving charity to, then there is no spiritual advancement. In other words,
indiscriminate charity is not recommended in the Vedic literature.
64. What kinds of charity are said to be given in the mode of passion? BG 17.21
Charity is sometimes performed for elevation to the heavenly kingdom and sometimes
with great trouble and with repentance afterwards: “Why have I spent so much in this
way?” Charity is also sometimes given under some obligation, at the request of a
superior. These kinds of charity are said to be given in the mode of passion.
65. Why Only charity in the mode of goodness is recommended ? BG 17.21
There are many charitable foundations which offer their gifts to institutions where
sense gratiﬁcation goes on. Such charities are not recommended in the Vedic scripture.
Only charity in the mode of goodness is recommended.
66. What sort of contribution is in the mode of ignorance? BG 17.22
Contributions for indulgence in intoxication and gambling are not encouraged here.
That sort of contribution is in the mode of ignorance.
67. What kind of charity is also said to be in the mode of darkness? BG 17.22
if a person gives charity to a suitable person but without respect and without attention,
that sort of charity is also said to be in the mode of darkness.
68. When they are aimed at the Supreme – o ṁ tat sat what it indiates? BG 17.23
When they are aimed at the Supreme – o ṁ tat sat, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the eternal – they become means for spiritual elevation. In the scriptural
injunctions such an objective is indicated.
69. Why In the Vedic hymns, the word o ṁ is always found? BG 17.23
These three words, o ṁ tat sat, particularly indicate the Absolute Truth, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. In the Vedic hymns, the word o ṁ is always found.
70. Why One who acts without following the regulations of the scriptures will not attain the Absolute Truth? BG
17.23
One who acts without following the regulations of the scriptures will not attain the
Absolute Truth. He will get some temporary result, but not the ultimate end of life.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad gita chapter-17 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/897896 9/1271. What are are certainly inferior in quality? BG 17.23
The conclusion is that the performance of charity, sacriﬁce and penance must be done
in the mode of goodness. Performed in the mode of passion or ignorance, they are
certainly inferior in quality.
72. Why Whenever a Vedic hymn or the holy name of the Supreme Lord is uttered, o ṁ is added? BG 17.23
The three words o ṁ tat sat are uttered in conjunction with the holy name of the
Supreme Lord, e.g., o ṁ tad vi ṣṇ o ḥ . Whenever a Vedic hymn or the holy name of the
Supreme Lord is uttered, o ṁ is added. This is the indication of Vedic literature.
73. What indicates the ﬁrst goal? BG 17.23
These three words are taken from Vedic hymns. O ṁ ity etad brahma ṇ o nedi ṣṭ ha ṁ
nāma indicates the ﬁrst goal.
74. What indicates the second goal? BG 17.23
Then tat tvam asi (Chāndogya Upani ṣ ad 6.8.7) indicates the second goal.
75. What indicates the third goal? BG 17.23
sad eva saumya (Chāndogya Upani ṣ ad 6.2.1) indicates the third goal.
76. Why o ṁ tat sat hymn has great signiﬁcance? BG 17.23
Formerly when Brahmā, the ﬁrst created living entity, performed sacriﬁces, he
indicated by these three words the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the
same principle has always been followed by disciplic succession. So this hymn has great
signiﬁcance.
77. Why Bhagavad-gītā recommends om tat sat hymes? BG 17.23
Bhagavad-gītā recommends, therefore, that any work done should be done for o ṁ tat
sat, or for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When one performs penance, charity
and sacriﬁce with these three words, he is acting in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness.
78. Why There is no loss of energy in acting in such a transcendental way? BG 17.23
K ṛṣṇa consciousness is a scientiﬁc execution of transcendental activities which enables
one to return home, back to Godhead. There is no loss of energy in acting in such a
transcendental way.
79. What assures the perfection of all activity? BG 17.24
O ṁ tad vi ṣṇ o ḥ parama ṁ padam ( Ṛ g Veda 1.22.20). The lotus feet of Vi ṣṇ u are the
supreme devotional platform. The performance of everything on behalf of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead assures the perfection of all activity.
80. Why transcendentalists begin always with o ṁ ? BG 17.24
transcendentalists undertaking performances of sacriﬁce, charity and penance in
accordance with scriptural regulations begin always with o ṁ , to attain the Supreme.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad gita chapter-17 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/897896 10/1281. What the word tat indicates? BG 17.25
Without desiring fruitive results, one should perform various kinds of sacriﬁce, penance
and charity with the word tat.
82. What is The purpose of such transcendental activities? BG 17.25
To be elevated to the spiritual position, one should not act for any material gain. Acts
should be performed for the ultimate gain of being transferred to the spiritual kingdom,
back to home, back to Godhead.
83. What The words praśaste karma ṇ i, or “prescribed duties,” indicate? BG 17.26-27
The words praśaste karma ṇ i, or “prescribed duties,” indicate that there are many
activities prescribed in the Vedic literature which are puriﬁcatory processes
84. When the purification process begins? Bg 17.26-27
beginning from the time of conception up to the end of one’s life. Such puriﬁcatory
processes are adopted for the ultimate liberation of the living entity. In all such
activities it is recommended that one vibrate o ṁ tat sat.
85. What The words sad-bhāve and sādhu-bhāve indicate? BG 17.26-27
The words sad-bhāve and sādhu-bhāve indicate the transcendental situation.
86. What is called sattva? BG 17.26-27
Acting in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness is called sattva
87. Who is called a sādhu? BG 17.26-27
one who is fully conscious of the activities of K ṛṣṇ a consciousness is called a sādhu
88. What is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam? BG 17.26-27
In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.25.25) it is said that the transcendental subject matter
becomes clear in the association of the devotees.
89. What is the word satā ṁ prasa ṅ gāt means? Bg 17.26-27
The words used are satā ṁ prasa ṅ gāt. Without good association, one cannot achieve
transcendental knowledge.
90. When initiating a person or offering the sacred thread what one vibrates? BG 17.26-27
When initiating a person or offering the sacred thread, one vibrates the words o ṁ tat
sat.
91. What is the object in all kinds of performance of yajña? BG 17.26-27
in all kinds of performance of yajña the object is the Supreme, o ṁ tat sat.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad gita chapter-17 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/897896 11/1292. What is The word tad-arthīyam further means ? BG 17.26-27
The word tad-arthīyam further means offering service to anything which represents the
Supreme, including such service as cooking and helping in the Lord’s temple, or any
other kind of work for broadcasting the glories of the Lord. These supreme words o ṁ
tat sat are thus used in many ways to perfect all activities and make everything
complete.
93. Why Anything done without the transcendental objective is useless? BG 17.28
Anything done without the transcendental objective – whether it be sacriﬁce, charity or
penance – is useless.
94. What are the acitivities are abominable? BG 17.28
Anything done without the transcendental objective it is declared that such activities
are abominable
95. When there can never be any fruit? BG 17.28
Everything should be done for the Supreme in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness. Without such faith,
and without the proper guidance, there can never be any fruit.
96. Why In all the Vedic scriptures, faith in the Supreme is advised? BG 17.28
In all the Vedic scriptures, faith in the Supreme is advised. In the pursuit of all Vedic
instructions, the ultimate goal is the understanding of K ṛṣṇ a. No one can obtain success
without following this principle.
97. What is the way to make everything successful? BG 17.28
Therefore, the best course is to work from the very beginning in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness
under the guidance of a bona ﬁde spiritual master. That is the way to make everything
successful.
98. In the conditional state how people are attacted to worship? BG 17.28
In the conditional state, people are attracted to worshiping demigods, ghosts, or Yak ṣ as
like Kuvera.
99. Why The mode of goodness is better? BG 17.28
The mode of goodness is better than the modes of passion and ignorance,
100. Why directly to K ṛṣṇ a consciousness is better? BG 17.28
one who takes directly to K ṛṣṇ a consciousness is transcendental to all three modes of
material nature. Although there is a process of gradual elevation, if one, by the
association of pure devotees, takes directly to K ṛṣṇ a consciousness, that is the best
way. And that is recommended in this chapter.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad gita chapter-17 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/897896 12/12101. What is the process of taking krishna consciousness? Bg 17.28
To achieve success in this way, one must ﬁrst ﬁnd the proper spiritual master and
receive training under his direction. Then one can achieve faith in the Supreme. When
that faith matures, in course of time, it is called love of God. This love is the ultimate
goal of the living entities. One should therefore take to K ṛṣṇ a consciousness directly.
