Introduction
om ajnana-timirandhasya
jnananjana-salakaya
caksur unmilitam yena
tasmai sri-gurave namah
sri-caitanya-mano-'bhistam
sthapitam yena bhu-tale
svayam rupah kada mahyam
dadati sva-padantikam
I was born in the darkest ignorance, and my spiritual master opened myeyes with the torch of knowledge. I offer my respectful obeisances untohim.
When will Srila Rupa Gosvami Prabhupada, who has established within
this material world the mission to fulfill the desire of Lord Caitanya,give me shelter under his lotus feet?
vande 'ham sri-guroh sri-yuta-pada-kamalam sri-gurun vaisnavams ca
sri-rupam sagrajatam saha-gana-raghunathanvitam tam sa-jivam
sadvaitam savadhutam parijana-sahitam krsna-caitanya-devam
sri-radha-krsna-padan saha-gana-lalita-sri-visakhanvitams ca
I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of my spiritualmaster and unto the feet of all Vaisnavas. I offer my respectfulobeisances unto the lotus feet of Srila Rupa Gosvami along with hiselder brother Sanatana Gosvami, as well as Raghunatha Dasa andRaghunatha Bhatta, Gopala Bhatta, and Srila Jiva Gosvami. I offer myrespectful obeisances to Lord Krsna Caitanya and Lord Nityananda alongwith Advaita Acarya, Gadadhara, Srivasa, and other associates. I offermy respectful obeisances to Srimati Radharani and Sri Krsna along withTheir associates, Sri Lalita and Visakha.
he krsna karuna-sindho
dina-bandho jagat-pate
gopesa gopika-kanta
radha-kanta namo 'stu te
O my dear Krsna, You are the friend of the distressed and the source ofcreation. You are the master of the gopis and the lover of Radharani. Ioffer my respectful obeisances unto You.
tapta-kancana-gaurangi
radhe vrndavanesvari
vrsabhanu-sute devi
pranamami hari-priye
I offer my respects to Radharani whose bodily complexion is like molten
gold and who is the Queen of Vrndavana. You are the daughter of KingVrsabhanu, and You are very dear to Lord Krsna.
vancha-kalpatarubhyas ca
krpa-sindhubhya eva ca
patitanam pavanebhyo
vaisnavebhyo namo namah
I offer my respectful obeisances unto all the Vaisnava devotees of the
Lord who can fulfill the desires of everyone, just like desire trees,and who are full of compassion for the fallen souls.
sri-krsna-caitanya
prabhu-nityananda
sri-advaita gadadhara
srivasadi-gaura-bhakta-vrnda
I offer my obeisances to Sri Krsna Caitanya, Prabhu Nityananda, SriAdvaita, Gadadhara, Srivasa and all others in the line of devotion.
hare krsna hare krsna
krsna krsna hare hare
hare rama hare rama
rama rama hare hare
Bhagavad-gita is also known as Gitopanisad. It is the essence of Vedicknowledge and one of the most important Upanisads in Vedic literature.Of course there are many commentaries in English on the Bhagavad-gita,and one may question the necessity for another one. This presentedition can be explained in the following way. Recently an Americanlady asked me to recommend an English translation of Bhagavad-gita. Ofcourse in America there are so many editions of Bhagavad-gita availablein English, but as far as I have seen, not only in America but also inIndia, none of them can be strictly said to be authoritative because inalmost every one of them the commentator has expressed his own opinionswithout touching the spirit of Bhagavad-gita as it is.
The spirit of Bhagavad-gita is mentioned in Bhagavad-gita itself. It is
just like this: If we want to take a particular medicine, then we haveto follow the directions written on the label. We cannot take themedicine according to our own whim or the direction of a friend. Itmust be taken according to the directions on the label or thedirections given by a physician. Similarly, Bhagavad-gita should betaken or accepted as it is directed by the speaker Himself. The speakerof Bhagavad-gita is Lord Sri Krsna. He is mentioned on every page ofBhagavad-gita as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Bhagavan. Ofcourse the word bhagavan sometimes refers to any powerful person or anypowerful demigod, and certainly here bhagavan designates Lord Sri Krsnaas a great personality, but at the same time we should know that LordSri Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as is confirmed by allgreat acaryas (spiritual masters) like Sankaracarya, Ramanujacarya,Madhvacarya, Nimbarka Svami, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and many otherauthorities of Vedic knowledge in India. The Lord Himself alsoestablishes Himself as the Supreme Personality of Godhead in theBhagavad-gita, and He is accepted as such in the Brahma-samhita and allthe Puranas, especially the Srimad-Bhagavatam, known as the BhagavataPurana (krsnas tu bhagavan svayam). Therefore we should take Bhagavad-gita as it is directed by the Personality of Godhead Himself. In theFourth Chapter of the Gita (4.1-3) the Lord says:
imam vivasvate yogam
proktavan aham avyayam
vivasvan manave praha
manur iksvakave 'bravit
evam parampara-praptam
imam rajarsayo viduh
sa kaleneha mahata
yogo nastah parantapa
sa evayam maya te 'dya
yogah proktah puratanah
bhakto 'si me sakha ceti
rahasyam hy etad uttamam
Here the Lord informs Arjuna that this system of yoga, the Bhagavad-gita, was first spoken to the sun-god, and the sun-god explained it toManu, and Manu explained it to Iksvaku, and in that way, by disciplicsuccession, one speaker after another, this yoga system has been comingdown. But in the course of time it has become lost. Consequently theLord has to speak it again, this time to Arjuna on the Battlefield ofKuruksetra.
He tells Arjuna that He is relating this supreme secret to him because
he is His devotee and His friend. The purport of this is that Bhagavad-gita is a treatise which is especially meant for the devotee of theLord. There are three classes of transcendentalists, namely the jnani,the yogi and the bhakta, or the impersonalist, the meditator and thedevotee. Here the Lord clearly tells Arjuna that He is making him thefirst receiver of a new parampara (disciplic succession) because theold succession was broken. It was the Lord's wish, therefore, toestablish another parampara in the same line of thought that was comingdown from the sun-god to others, and it was His wish that His teachingbe distributed anew by Arjuna. He wanted Arjuna to become the authorityin understanding the Bhagavad-gita. So we see that Bhagavad-gita isinstructed to Arjuna especially because Arjuna was a devotee of theLord, a direct student of Krsna, and His intimate friend. ThereforeBhagavad-gita is best understood by a person who has qualities similarto Arjuna's. That is to say he must be a devotee in a directrelationship with the Lord. That is a very elaborate subject matter,but briefly it can be stated that a devotee is in a relationship withthe Supreme Personality of Godhead in one of five different ways:
1. One may be a devotee in a passive state;
2. One may be a devotee in an active state;3. One may be a devotee as a friend;4. One may be a devotee as a parent;5. One may be a devotee as a conjugal lover.
Arjuna was in a relationship with the Lord as friend. Of course there
is a gulf of difference between this friendship and the friendshipfound in the material world. This is transcendental friendship whichcannot be had by everyone. Of course everyone has a particularrelationship with the Lord, and that relationship is evoked by theperfection of devotional service. But in the present status of ourlife, we have not only forgotten the Supreme Lord, but we haveforgotten our eternal relationship with the Lord. Every living being,out of the many, many billions and trillions of living beings, has aparticular relationship with the Lord eternally. That is calledsvarupa. By the process of devotional service, one can revive thatsvarupa, and that stage is called svarupa-siddhi--perfection of one'sconstitutional position. So Arjuna was a devotee, and he was in touchwith the Supreme Lord in friendship.
How Arjuna accepted this Bhagavad-gita should be noted. His manner of
acceptance is given in the Tenth Chapter (10.12-14):
arjuna uvaca
param brahma param dhama
pavitram paramam bhavan
purusam sasvatam divyam
adi-devam ajam vibhum
ahus tvam rsayah sarve
devarsir naradas tatha
asito devalo vyasah
svayam caiva bravisi me
sarvam etad rtam manye
yan mam vadasi kesava
na hi te bhagavan vyaktim
vidur deva na danavah
"Arjuna said: You are the Supreme Brahman, the ultimate, the supremeabode and purifier, the Absolute Truth and the eternal Divine Person.You are the primal God, transcendental and original, and you are theunborn and all-pervading beauty. All the great sages like Narada,Asita, Devala, and Vyasa proclaim this of You, and now You Yourself aredeclaring it to me. O Krsna, I totally accept as truth all that Youhave told me. Neither the gods nor the demons, O Lord, know Thypersonality."
After hearing Bhagavad-gita from the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Arjuna accepted Krsna as param brahma, the Supreme Brahman. Everyliving being is Brahman, but the supreme living being, or the SupremePersonality of Godhead, is the Supreme Brahman. Param dhama means thatHe is the supreme rest or abode of everything; pavitram means that Heis pure, untainted by material contamination; purusam means that He isthe supreme enjoyer; sasvatam, original; divyam, transcendental; adi-devam, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ajam, the unborn; andvibhum, the greatest, the all-pervading.
Now one may think that because Krsna was the friend of Arjuna, Arjuna
was telling Him all this by way of flattery, but Arjuna, just to driveout this kind of doubt from the minds of the readers of Bhagavad-gita,substantiates these praises in the next verse when he says that Krsnais accepted as the Supreme Personality of Godhead not only by himselfbut by authorities like the sage Narada, Asita, Devala, Vyasadeva andso on. These are great personalities who distribute the Vedic knowledgeas it is accepted by all acaryas. Therefore Arjuna tells Krsna that heaccepts whatever He says to be completely perfect. Sarvam etad rtammanye: "I accept everything You say to be true." Arjuna also says thatthe personality of the Lord is very difficult to understand and that Hecannot be known even by the great demigods. This means that the Lordcannot even be known by personalities greater than human beings. So howcan a human being understand Sri Krsna without becoming His devotee?
Therefore Bhagavad-gita should be taken up in a spirit of devotion. One
should not think that he is equal to Krsna, nor should he think thatKrsna is an ordinary personality or even a very great personality. LordSri Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, at least
theoretically, according to the statements of Bhagavad-gita or the
statements of Arjuna, the person who is trying to understand theBhagavad-gita. We should therefore at least theoretically accept SriKrsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and with that submissivespirit we can understand the Bhagavad-gita. Unless one reads theBhagavad-gita in a submissive spirit, it is very difficult tounderstand Bhagavad-gita because it is a great mystery.
Just what is the Bhagavad-gita? The purpose of Bhagavad-gita is to
deliver mankind from the nescience of material existence. Every man isin difficulty in so many ways, as Arjuna also was in difficulty inhaving to fight the Battle of Kuruksetra. Arjuna surrendered unto SriKrsna, and consequently this Bhagavad-gita was spoken. Not only Arjuna,but every one of us is full of anxieties because of this materialexistence. Our very existence is in the atmosphere of nonexistence.Actually we are not meant to be threatened by nonexistence. Ourexistence is eternal. But somehow or other we are put into asat. Asatrefers to that which does not exist.
Out of so many human beings who are suffering, there are a few who are
actually inquiring about their position, as to what they are, why theyare put into this awkward position and so on. Unless one is awakened tothis position of questioning his suffering, unless he realizes that hedoesn't want suffering but rather wants to make a solution to allsuffering, then one is not to be considered a perfect human being.Humanity begins when this sort of inquiry is awakened in one's mind. Inthe Brahma-sutra this inquiry is called brahma jijnasa. Every activityof the human being is to be considered a failure unless he inquiresabout the nature of the Absolute. Therefore those who begin to questionwhy they are suffering or where they came from and where they shall goafter death are proper students for understanding Bhagavad-gita. Thesincere student should also have a firm respect for the SupremePersonality of Godhead. Such a student was Arjuna.
Lord Krsna descends specifically to reestablish the real purpose of
life when man forgets that purpose. Even then, out of many, many humanbeings who awaken, there may be one who actually enters the spirit ofunderstanding his position, and for him this Bhagavad-gita is spoken.Actually we are all followed by the tigress of nescience, but the Lordis very merciful upon living entities, especially human beings. To thisend He spoke the Bhagavad-gita, making His friend Arjuna His student.
Being an associate of Lord Krsna, Arjuna was above all ignorance, but
Arjuna was put into ignorance on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra just toquestion Lord Krsna about the problems of life so that the Lord couldexplain them for the benefit of future generations of human beings andchalk out the plan of life. Then man could act accordingly and perfectthe mission of human life.
The subject of the Bhagavad-gita entails the comprehension of five
basic truths. First of all, the science of God is explained and thenthe constitutional position of the living entities, jivas. There isisvara, which means controller, and there are jivas, the livingentities which are controlled. If a living entity says that he is notcontrolled but that he is free, then he is insane. The living being iscontrolled in every respect, at least in his conditioned life. So inthe Bhagavad-gita the subject matter deals with the isvara, the supremecontroller, and the jivas, the controlled living entities. Prakrti
(material nature) and time (the duration of existence of the whole
universe or the manifestation of material nature) and karma (activity)are also discussed. The cosmic manifestation is full of differentactivities. All living entities are engaged in different activities.From Bhagavad-gita we must learn what God is, what the living entitiesare, what prakrti is, what the cosmic manifestation is, how it iscontrolled by time, and what the activities of the living entities are.
Out of these five basic subject matters in Bhagavad-gita it is
established that the Supreme Godhead, or Krsna, or Brahman, or thesupreme controller, or Paramatma--you may use whatever name you like--is the greatest of all. The living beings are in quality like thesupreme controller. For instance, the Lord has control over theuniversal affairs, over material nature, as will be explained in thelater chapters of Bhagavad-gita. Material nature is not independent.She is acting under the directions of the Supreme Lord. As Lord Krsnasays, mayadhyaksena prakrtih suyate sa-caracaram: "This material natureis working under My direction." When we see wonderful things happeningin the cosmic nature, we should know that behind this cosmicmanifestation there is a controller. Nothing could be manifestedwithout being controlled. It is childish not to consider thecontroller. For instance, a child may think that an automobile is quitewonderful to be able to run without a horse or other animal pulling it,but a sane man knows the nature of the automobile's engineeringarrangement. He always knows that behind the machinery there is a man,a driver. Similarly, the Supreme Lord is a driver under whose directioneverything is working. Now the jivas, or the living entities, have beenaccepted by the Lord, as we will note in the later chapters, as Hisparts and parcels. A particle of gold is also gold, a drop of waterfrom the ocean is also salty, and similarly, we the living entities,being part and parcel of the supreme controller, isvara, or Bhagavan,Lord Sri Krsna, have all the qualities of the Supreme Lord in minutequantity because we are minute isvaras, subordinate isvaras. We aretrying to control nature, as presently we are trying to control spaceor planets, and this tendency to control is there because it is inKrsna. But although we have a tendency to lord it over material nature,we should know that we are not the supreme controller. This isexplained in Bhagavad-gita.
What is material nature? This is also explained in Gita as inferior
prakrti, inferior nature. The living entity is explained as thesuperior prakrti. Prakrti is always under control, whether inferior orsuperior. Prakrti is female, and she is controlled by the Lord just asthe activities of a wife are controlled by the husband. Prakrti isalways subordinate, predominated by the Lord, who is the predominator.The living entities and material nature are both predominated,controlled by the Supreme Lord. According to the Gita, the livingentities, although parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord, are to beconsidered prakrti. This is clearly mentioned in the Seventh Chapter,Fifth Verse of Bhagavad-gita: Apareyam itas tv anyam, "This prakrti isMy lower nature," prakrtim viddhi me param jiva-bhutam maha-bahoyayedam dharyate jagat. And beyond this there is another prakrti: jiva-bhutam, the living entity.
Prakrti itself is constituted by three qualities: the mode of goodness,
the mode of passion and the mode of ignorance. Above these modes thereis eternal time, and by a combination of these modes of nature andunder the control and purview of eternal time there are activities
which are called karma. These activities are being carried out from
time immemorial, and we are suffering or enjoying the fruits of ouractivities. For instance, suppose I am a businessman and have workedvery hard with intelligence and have amassed a great bank balance. ThenI am an enjoyer. But then say I have lost all my money in business;then I am a sufferer. Similarly, in every field of life we enjoy theresults of our work, or we suffer the results. This is called karma.
Isvara (the Supreme Lord), jiva (the living entity), prakrti (nature),
eternal time and karma (activity) are all explained in the Bhagavad-gita. Out of these five, the Lord, the living entities, material natureand time are eternal. The manifestation of prakrti may be temporary,but it is not false. Some philosophers say that the manifestation ofmaterial nature is false, but according to the philosophy of Bhagavad-gita or according to the philosophy of the Vaisnavas, this is not so.The manifestation of the world is not accepted as false; it is acceptedas real, but temporary. It is likened unto a cloud which moves acrossthe sky, or the coming of the rainy season which nourishes grains. Assoon as the rainy season is over and as soon as the cloud goes away,all the crops which were nourished by the rain dry up. Similarly, thismaterial manifestation takes place at a certain interval, stays for awhile and then disappears. Such are the workings of prakrti. But thiscycle is working eternally. Therefore prakrti is eternal; it is notfalse. The Lord refers to this as "My prakrti." This material nature isthe separated energy of the Supreme Lord, and similarly the livingentities are also the energy of the Supreme Lord, but they are notseparated. They are eternally related. So the Lord, the living entity,material nature and time are all interrelated and are all eternal.However, the other item, karma, is not eternal. The effects of karmamay be very old indeed. We are suffering or enjoying the results of ouractivities from time immemorial, but we can change the results of ourkarma, or our activity, and this change depends on the perfection ofour knowledge. We are engaged in various activities. Undoubtedly we donot know what sort of activities we should adopt to gain relief fromthe actions and reactions of all these activities, but this is alsoexplained in the Bhagavad-gita.
The position of isvara is that of supreme consciousness. The jivas, or
the living entities, being parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord, arealso conscious. Both the living entity and material nature areexplained as prakrti, the energy of the Supreme Lord, but one of thetwo, the jiva, is conscious. The other prakrti is not conscious. Thatis the difference. Therefore the jiva-prakrti is called superiorbecause the jiva has consciousness which is similar to the Lord's. TheLord's is supreme consciousness, however, and one should not claim thatthe jiva, the living entity, is also supremely conscious. The livingbeing cannot be supremely conscious at any stage of his perfection, andthe theory that he can be so is a misleading theory. Conscious he maybe, but he is not perfectly or supremely conscious.
The distinction between the jiva and the isvara will be explained in
the Thirteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gita. The Lord is ksetra-jna,conscious, as is the living being, but the living being is conscious ofhis particular body, whereas the Lord is conscious of all bodies.Because He lives in the heart of every living being, He is conscious ofthe psychic movements of the particular jivas. We should not forgetthis. It is also explained that the Paramatma, the Supreme Personalityof Godhead, is living in everyone's heart as isvara, as the controller,
and that He is giving directions for the living entity to act as he
desires. The living entity forgets what to do. First of all he makes adetermination to act in a certain way, and then he is entangled in theactions and reactions of his own karma. After giving up one type ofbody, he enters another type of body, as we put on and take off oldclothes. As the soul thus migrates, he suffers the actions andreactions of his past activities. These activities can be changed whenthe living being is in the mode of goodness, in sanity, and understandswhat sort of activities he should adopt. If he does so, then all theactions and reactions of his past activities can be changed.Consequently, karma is not eternal. Therefore we stated that of thefive items (isvara, jiva, prakrti, time and karma) four are eternal,whereas karma is not eternal.
The supreme conscious isvara is similar to the living entity in this
way: both the consciousness of the Lord and that of the living entityare transcendental. It is not that consciousness is generated by theassociation of matter. That is a mistaken idea. The theory thatconsciousness develops under certain circumstances of materialcombination is not accepted in the Bhagavad-gita. Consciousness may bepervertedly reflected by the covering of material circumstances, justas light reflected through colored glass may appear to be a certaincolor, but the consciousness of the Lord is not materially affected.Lord Krsna says, mayadhyaksena prakrtih. When He descends into thematerial universe, His consciousness is not materially affected. If Hewere so affected, He would be unfit to speak on transcendental mattersas He does in the Bhagavad-gita. One cannot say anything about thetranscendental world without being free from materially contaminatedconsciousness. So the Lord is not materially contaminated. Ourconsciousness, at the present moment, however, is materiallycontaminated. The Bhagavad-gita teaches that we have to purify thismaterially contaminated consciousness. In pure consciousness, ouractions will be dovetailed to the will of isvara, and that will make ushappy. It is not that we have to cease all activities. Rather, ouractivities are to be purified, and purified activities are calledbhakti. Activities in bhakti appear to be like ordinary activities, butthey are not contaminated. An ignorant person may see that a devotee isacting or working like an ordinary man, but such a person with a poorfund of knowledge does not know that the activities of the devotee orof the Lord are not contaminated by impure consciousness or matter.They are transcendental to the three modes of nature. We should know,however, that at this point our consciousness is contaminated.
When we are materially contaminated, we are called conditioned. False
consciousness is exhibited under the impression that I am a product ofmaterial nature. This is called false ego. One who is absorbed in thethought of bodily conceptions cannot understand his situation.Bhagavad-gita was spoken to liberate one from the bodily conception oflife, and Arjuna put himself in this position in order to receive thisinformation from the Lord. One must become free from the bodilyconception of life; that is the preliminary activity for thetranscendentalist. One who wants to become free, who wants to becomeliberated, must first of all learn that he is not this material body.Mukti or liberation means freedom from material consciousness. In theSrimad-Bhagavatam also the definition of liberation is given. Muktirhitvanyatha-rupam svarupena vyavasthitih: mukti means liberation fromthe contaminated consciousness of this material world and situation inpure consciousness. All the instructions of Bhagavad-gita are intended
to awaken this pure consciousness, and therefore we find at the last
stage of the Gita's instructions that Krsna is asking Arjuna whether heis now in purified consciousness. Purified consciousness means actingin accordance with the instructions of the Lord. This is the whole sumand substance of purified consciousness. Consciousness is already therebecause we are part and parcel of the Lord, but for us there is theaffinity of being affected by the inferior modes. But the Lord, beingthe Supreme, is never affected. That is the difference between theSupreme Lord and the conditioned souls.
What is this consciousness? This consciousness is "I am." Then what am
I? In contaminated consciousness "I am" means "I am the lord of all Isurvey. I am the enjoyer." The world revolves because every livingbeing thinks that he is the lord and creator of the material world.Material consciousness has two psychic divisions. One is that I am thecreator, and the other is that I am the enjoyer. But actually theSupreme Lord is both the creator and the enjoyer, and the livingentity, being part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, is neither thecreator nor the enjoyer, but a cooperator. He is the created and theenjoyed. For instance, a part of a machine cooperates with the wholemachine; a part of the body cooperates with the whole body. The hands,feet, eyes, legs and so on are all parts of the body, but they are notactually the enjoyers. The stomach is the enjoyer. The legs move, thehands supply food, the teeth chew, and all parts of the body areengaged in satisfying the stomach because the stomach is the principalfactor that nourishes the body's organization. Therefore everything isgiven to the stomach. One nourishes the tree by watering its root, andone nourishes the body by feeding the stomach, for if the body is to bekept in a healthy state, then the parts of the body must cooperate tofeed the stomach. Similarly, the Supreme Lord is the enjoyer and thecreator, and we, as subordinate living beings, are meant to cooperateto satisfy Him. This cooperation will actually help us, just as foodtaken by the stomach will help all other parts of the body. If thefingers of the hand think that they should take the food themselvesinstead of giving it to the stomach, then they will be frustrated. Thecentral figure of creation and of enjoyment is the Supreme Lord, andthe living entities are cooperators. By cooperation they enjoy. Therelation is also like that of the master and the servant. If the masteris fully satisfied, then the servant is satisfied. Similarly, theSupreme Lord should be satisfied, although the tendency to become thecreator and the tendency to enjoy the material world are there also inthe living entities because these tendencies are there in the SupremeLord who has created the manifested cosmic world.
We shall find, therefore, in this Bhagavad-gita that the complete whole
is comprised of the supreme controller, the controlled living entities,the cosmic manifestation, eternal time and karma, or activities, andall of these are explained in this text. All of these taken completelyform the complete whole, and the complete whole is called the SupremeAbsolute Truth. The complete whole and the complete Absolute Truth arethe Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna. All manifestations aredue to His different energies. He is the complete whole.
It is also explained in the Gita that impersonal Brahman is also
subordinate to the complete (brahmano hi pratisthaham). Brahman is moreexplicitly explained in the Brahma-sutra to be like the rays of thesunshine. The impersonal Brahman is the shining rays of the SupremePersonality of Godhead. Impersonal Brahman is incomplete realization of
the absolute whole, and so also is the conception of Paramatma in the
Twelfth Chapter. There it shall be seen that the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, Purusottama, is above both impersonal Brahman and the partialrealization of Paramatma. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is calledsac-cid-ananda-vigraha. The Brahma-samhita begins in this way: isvarahparamah krsnah sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah. anadir adir govindah sarva-karana-karanam. "Krsna, is the cause of all causes. He is the primalcause, and He is the very form of eternity, knowledge and bliss."Impersonal Brahman realization is the realization of His sat (being)feature. Paramatma realization is the realization of cit (eternalknowledge). But realization of the Personality of Godhead, Krsna, isrealization of all the transcendental features: sat, cit and ananda(being, knowledge, bliss) in complete vigraha (form).
People with less intelligence consider the Supreme Truth to be
impersonal, but He is a transcendental person, and this is confirmed inall Vedic literatures. Nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam. (KathaUpanisad 2.2.13) As we are all individual living beings and have ourindividuality, the Supreme Absolute Truth is also, in the ultimateissue, a person, and realization of the Personality of Godhead isrealization of all of the transcendental features. The complete wholeis not formless. If He is formless, or if He is less than any otherthing, then He cannot be the complete whole. The complete whole musthave everything within our experience and beyond our experience,otherwise it cannot be complete. The complete whole, Personality ofGodhead, has immense potencies (parasya saktir vividhaiva sruyate).
How Krsna is acting in different potencies is also explained in
Bhagavad-gita. This phenomenal world or material world in which we areplaced is also complete in itself because the twenty-four elements ofwhich this material universe is a temporary manifestation, according toSankhya philosophy, are completely adjusted to produce completeresources which are necessary for the maintenance and subsistence ofthis universe. There is nothing extraneous; nor is there anythingneeded. This manifestation has its own time fixed by the energy of thesupreme whole, and when its time is complete, these temporarymanifestations will be annihilated by the complete arrangement of thecomplete. There is complete facility for the small complete units,namely the living entities, to realize the complete, and all sorts ofincompleteness are experienced due to incomplete knowledge of thecomplete. So Bhagavad-gita contains the complete knowledge of Vedicwisdom.
All Vedic knowledge is infallible, and Hindus accept Vedic knowledge to
be complete and infallible. For example, cow dung is the stool of ananimal, and according to smrti, or Vedic injunction, if one touches thestool of an animal he has to take a bath to purify himself. But in theVedic scriptures cow dung is considered to be a purifying agent. Onemight consider this to be contradictory, but it is accepted because itis Vedic injunction, and indeed by accepting this, one will not commita mistake; subsequently it has been proved by modern science that cowdung contains all antiseptic properties. So Vedic knowledge is completebecause it is above all doubts and mistakes, and Bhagavad-gita is theessence of all Vedic knowledge.
Vedic knowledge is not a question of research. Our research work is
imperfect because we are researching things with imperfect senses. Wehave to accept perfect knowledge which comes down, as is stated in
Bhagavad-gita, by the parampara (disciplic succession). We have to
receive knowledge from the proper source in disciplic successionbeginning with the supreme spiritual master, the Lord Himself, andhanded down to a succession of spiritual masters. Arjuna, the studentwho took lessons from Lord Sri Krsna, accepts everything that He sayswithout contradicting Him. One is not allowed to accept one portion ofBhagavad-gita and not another. No. We must accept Bhagavad-gita withoutinterpretation, without deletion and without our own whimsicalparticipation in the matter. The Gita should be taken as the mostperfect presentation of Vedic knowledge. Vedic knowledge is receivedfrom transcendental sources, and the first words were spoken by theLord Himself. The words spoken by the Lord are called apauruseya,meaning that they are different from words spoken by a person of themundane world who is infected with four defects. A mundaner is 1) issure to commit mistakes, 2) is invariably illusioned, 3) has thetendency to cheat others and 4) is limited by imperfect senses. Withthese four imperfections, one cannot deliver perfect information ofall-pervading knowledge.
Vedic knowledge is not imparted by such defective living entities. It
was imparted unto the heart of Brahma, the first created living being,and Brahma in his turn disseminated this knowledge to his sons anddisciples, as he originally received it from the Lord. The Lord ispurnam, all-perfect, and there is no possibility of His becomingsubjected to the laws of material nature. One should therefore beintelligent enough to know that the Lord is the only proprietor ofeverything in the universe and that He is the original creator, thecreator of Brahma. In the Eleventh Chapter the Lord is addressed asprapitamaha because Brahma is addressed as pitamaha, the grandfather,and He is the creator of the grandfather. So no one should claim to bethe proprietor of anything; one should accept only things which are setaside for him by the Lord as his quota for his maintenance.
There are many examples given of how we are to utilize those things
which are set aside for us by the Lord. This is also explained inBhagavad-gita. In the beginning, Arjuna decided that he should notfight in the Battle of Kuruksetra. This was his own decision. Arjunatold the Lord that it was not possible for him to enjoy the kingdomafter killing his own kinsmen. This decision was based on the bodybecause he was thinking that the body was himself and that his bodilyrelations or expansions were his brothers, nephews, brothers-in-law,grandfathers and so on. He was thinking in this way to satisfy hisbodily demands. Bhagavad-gita was spoken by the Lord just to changethis view, and at the end Arjuna decides to fight under the directionsof the Lord when he says, karisye vacanam tava: "I shall act accordingto Thy word."
In this world man is not meant to toil like hogs. He must be
intelligent to realize the importance of human life and refuse to actlike an ordinary animal. A human being should realize the aim of hislife, and this direction is given in all Vedic literatures, and theessence is given in Bhagavad-gita. Vedic literature is meant for humanbeings, not for animals. Animals can kill other living animals, andthere is no question of sin on their part, but if a man kills an animalfor the satisfaction of his uncontrolled taste, he must be responsiblefor breaking the laws of nature. In the Bhagavad-gita it is clearlyexplained that there are three kinds of activities according to thedifferent modes of nature: the activities of goodness, of passion and
of ignorance. Similarly, there are three kinds of eatables also:
eatables in goodness, passion and ignorance. All of this is clearlydescribed, and if we properly utilize the instructions of Bhagavad-gita, then our whole life will become purified, and ultimately we willbe able to reach the destination which is beyond this material sky.
That destination is called the sanatana sky, the eternal spiritual sky.
In this material world we find that everything is temporary. It comesinto being, stays for some time, produces some by-products, dwindlesand then vanishes. That is the law of the material world, whether weuse as an example this body, or a piece of fruit or anything. Butbeyond this temporary world there is another world of which we haveinformation. This world consists of another nature, which is sanatana,eternal. Jiva is also described as sanatana, eternal, and the Lord isalso described as sanatana in the Eleventh Chapter. We have an intimaterelationship with the Lord, and because we are all qualitatively one--the sanatana-dhama, or sky, the sanatana Supreme Personality and thesanatana living entities--the whole purpose of Bhagavad-gita is torevive our sanatana occupation, or sanatana-dharma, which is theeternal occupation of the living entity. We are temporarily engaged indifferent activities, but all of these activities can be purified whenwe give up all these temporary activities and take up the activitieswhich are prescribed by the Supreme Lord. That is called our pure life.
The Supreme Lord and His transcendental abode are both sanatana, as are
the living entities, and the combined association of the Supreme Lordand the living entities in the sanatana abode is the perfection ofhuman life. The Lord is very kind to the living entities because theyare His sons. Lord Krsna declares in Bhagavad-gita, sarva-yonisu...aham bija-pradah pita: "I am the father of all." Of course there areall types of living entities according to their various karmas, buthere the Lord claims that He is the father of all of them. Thereforethe Lord descends to reclaim all of these fallen, conditioned souls tocall them back to the sanatana eternal sky so that the sanatana livingentities may regain their eternal sanatana positions in eternalassociation with the Lord. The Lord comes Himself in differentincarnations, or He sends His confidential servants as sons or Hisassociates or acaryas to reclaim the conditioned souls.
Therefore, sanatana-dharma does not refer to any sectarian process of
religion. It is the eternal function of the eternal living entities inrelationship with the eternal Supreme Lord. Sanatana-dharma refers, asstated previously, to the eternal occupation of the living entity.Ramanujacarya has explained the word sanatana as "that which hasneither beginning nor end," so when we speak of sanatana-dharma, wemust take it for granted on the authority of Sri Ramanujacarya that ithas neither beginning nor end.
The English world religion is a little different from sanatana-dharma.
Religion conveys the idea of faith, and faith may change. One may havefaith in a particular process, and he may change this faith and adoptanother, but sanatana-dharma refers to that activity which cannot bechanged. For instance, liquidity cannot be taken from water, nor canheat be taken from fire. Similarly, the eternal function of the eternalliving entity cannot be taken from the living entity. Sanatana-dharmais eternally integral with the living entity. When we speak ofsanatana-dharma, therefore, we must take it for granted on theauthority of Sri Ramanujacarya that it has neither beginning nor end.
That which has neither end nor beginning must not be sectarian, for it
cannot be limited by any boundaries. Those belonging to some sectarianfaith will wrongly consider that sanatana-dharma is also sectarian, butif we go deeply into the matter and consider it in the light of modernscience, it is possible for us to see that sanatana-dharma is thebusiness of all the people of the world--nay, of all the livingentities of the universe.
Non-sanatana religious faith may have some beginning in the annals of
human history, but there is no beginning to the history of sanatana-dharma because it remains eternally with the living entities. Insofaras the living entities are concerned, the authoritative sastras statethat the living entity has neither birth nor death. In the Gita it isstated that the living entity is never born, and he never dies. He iseternal and indestructible, and he continues to live after thedestruction of his temporary material body. In reference to the conceptof sanatana-dharma, we must try to understand the concept of religionfrom the Sanskrit root meaning of the word. Dharma refers to that whichis constantly existing with a particular object. We conclude that thereis heat and light along with the fire; without heat and light, there isno meaning to the word fire. Similarly, we must discover the essentialpart of the living being, that part which is his constant companion.That constant companion is his eternal quality, and that eternalquality is his eternal religion.
When Sanatana Gosvami asked Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu about the svarupa
of every living being, the Lord replied that the svarupa orconstitutional position of the living being is the rendering of serviceto the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If we analyze this statement ofLord Caitanya's, we can easily see that every living being isconstantly engaged in rendering service to another living being. Aliving being serves other living beings in two capacities. By doing so,the living entity enjoys life. The lower animals serve human beings asservants serve their master. A serves B master, B serves C master and Cserves D master and so on. Under these circumstances, we can see thatone friend serves another friend, the mother serves the son, the wifeserves the husband, the husband serves the wife and so on. If we go onsearching in this spirit, it will be seen that there is no exception inthe society of living beings to the activity of service. The politicianpresents his manifesto for the public to convince them of his capacityfor service. The voters therefore give the politician their valuablevotes, thinking that he will render valuable service to society. Theshopkeeper serves the customer, and the artisan serves the capitalist.The capitalist serves the family, and the family serves the state inthe terms of the eternal capacity of the eternal living being. In thisway we can see that no living being is exempt from rendering service toother living beings, and therefore we can safely conclude that serviceis the constant companion of the living being and that the rendering ofservice is the eternal religion of the living being.
Yet man professes to belong to a particular type of faith with
reference to particular time and circumstance and thus claims to be aHindu, Muslim, Christian, Buddhist or any other sect. Such designationsare non-sanatana-dharma. A Hindu may change his faith to become aMuslim, or a Muslim may change his faith to become a Hindu, or aChristian may change his faith and so on. But in all circumstances thechange of religious faith does not affect the eternal occupation ofrendering service to others. The Hindu, Muslim or Christian in all
circumstances is servant of someone. Thus, to profess a particular type
of sect is not to profess one's sanatana-dharma. The rendering ofservice is sanatana-dharma.
Factually we are related to the Supreme Lord in service. The Supreme
Lord is the supreme enjoyer, and we living entities are His servitors.We are created for His enjoyment, and if we participate in that eternalenjoyment with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, we become happy. Wecannot become happy otherwise. It is not possible to be happyindependently, just as no one part of the body can be happy withoutcooperating with the stomach. It is not possible for the living entityto be happy without rendering transcendental loving service unto theSupreme Lord.
In the Bhagavad-gita, worship of different demigods or rendering
service to them is not approved. It is stated in the Seventh Chapter,twentieth verse:
kamais tais tair hrta-jnanah
prapadyante 'nya-devatah
tam tam niyamam asthaya
prakrtya niyatah svaya
"Those whose minds are distorted by material desires surrender untodemigods and follow the particular rules and regulations of worshipaccording to their own natures." Here it is plainly said that those whoare directed by lust worship the demigods and not the Supreme LordKrsna. When we mention the name Krsna, we do not refer to any sectarianname. Krsna means the highest pleasure, and it is confirmed that theSupreme Lord is the reservoir or storehouse of all pleasure. We are allhankering after pleasure. Ananda-mayo 'bhyasat (Vedanta-sutra 1.1.12).The living entities, like the Lord, are full of consciousness, and theyare after happiness. The Lord is perpetually happy, and if the livingentities associate with the Lord, cooperate with Him and take part inHis association, then they also become happy.
The Lord descends to this mortal world to show His pastimes in
Vrndavana, which are full of happiness. When Lord Sri Krsna was inVrndavana, His activities with His cowherd boyfriends, with His damselfriends, with the inhabitants of Vrndavana and with the cows were allfull of happiness. The total population of Vrndavana knew nothing butKrsna. But Lord Krsna even discouraged His father Nanda Maharaja fromworshiping the demigod Indra because He wanted to establish the factthat people need not worship any demigod. They need only worship theSupreme Lord because their ultimate goal is to return to His abode.
The abode of Lord Sri Krsna is described in the Bhagavad-gita,
Fifteenth Chapter, sixth verse:
na tad bhasayate suryo
na sasanko na pavakah
yad gatva na nivartante
tad dhama paramam mama
"That abode of Mine is not illumined by the sun or moon, nor byelectricity and anyone who reaches it never comes back to this materialworld."
This verse gives a description of that eternal sky. Of course we have a
material conception of the sky, and we think of it in relationship tothe sun, moon, stars and so on, but in this verse the Lord states thatin the eternal sky there is no need for the sun nor for the moon norfire of any kind because the spiritual sky is already illuminated bythe brahmajyoti, the rays emanating from the Supreme Lord. We aretrying with difficulty to reach other planets, but it is not difficultto understand the abode of the Supreme Lord. This abode is referred toas Goloka. In the Brahma-samhita (5.37) it is beautifully described:goloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhutah. The Lord resides eternally in Hisabode Goloka, yet He can be approached from this world, and to this endthe Lord comes to manifest His real form, sac-cid-ananda-vigraha. WhenHe manifests this form, there is no need for our imagining what Helooks like. To discourage such imaginative speculation, He descends andexhibits Himself as He is, as Syamasundara. Unfortunately, the lessintelligent deride Him because He comes as one of us and plays with usas a human being. But because of this we should not consider that theLord is one of us. It is by His omnipotency that He presents Himself inHis real form before us and displays His pastimes, which are prototypesof those pastimes found in His abode.
In the effulgent rays of the spiritual sky there are innumerable
planets floating. The brahmajyoti emanates from the supreme abode,Krsnaloka, and the anandamaya-cinmaya planets, which are not material,float in those rays. The Lord says, na tad bhasayate suryo na sasankona pavakah. yad gatva na nivartante tad dhama paramam mama. One who canapproach that spiritual sky is not required to descend again to thematerial sky. In the material sky, even if we approach the highestplanet (Brahmaloka), what to speak of the moon, we will find the sameconditions of life, namely birth, death, disease and old age. No planetin the material universe is free from these four principles of materialexistence. Therefore the Lord says in Bhagavad-gita, abrahma-bhuvanallokah punar avartino 'rjuna. The living entities are traveling from oneplanet to another, not by a mechanical arrangement but by a spiritualprocess. This is also mentioned: yanti deva-vrata devan pitrn yantipitr-vratah. No mechanical arrangement is necessary if we wantinterplanetary travel. The Gita instructs: yanti deva-vrata devan. Themoon, the sun and higher planets are called Svargaloka. There are threedifferent statuses of planets: higher, middle and lower planetarysystems. The earth belongs to the middle planetary system. Bhagavad-gita informs us how to travel to the higher planetary systems(Devaloka) with a very simple formula: yanti deva-vrata devan. One needonly worship the particular demigod of that particular planet and inthat way go to the moon, the sun or any of the higher planetarysystems.
Yet Bhagavad-gita does not advise us to go to any of the planets in
this material world because even if we go to Brahmaloka, the highestplanet, through some sort of mechanical contrivance by maybe travelingfor forty thousand years (and who would live that long?), we will stillfind the material inconveniences of birth, death, disease and old age.But one who wants to approach the supreme planet, Krsnaloka, or any ofthe other planets within the spiritual sky, will not meet with thesematerial inconveniences. Amongst all of the planets in the spiritualsky there is one supreme planet called Goloka Vrndavana, which is theoriginal planet in the abode of the original Personality of Godhead SriKrsna. All of this information is given in Bhagavad-gita, and we are
given through its instruction information how to leave the material
world and begin a truly blissful life in the spiritual sky.
In the Fifteenth Chapter of the Bhagavad-gita, the real picture of the
material world is given. It is said there:
urdhva-mulam adhah-sakham
asvattham prahur avyayam
chandamsi yasya parnani
yas tam veda sa veda-vit
"The Supreme Lord said: There is a banyan tree which has its rootsupward and its branches down, and the Vedic hymns are its leaves. Onewho knows this tree is the knower of the Vedas." (Bg 15.1) Here thematerial world is described as a tree whose roots are upwards andbranches are below. We have experience of a tree whose roots areupward: if one stands on the bank of a river or any reservoir of water,he can see that the trees reflected in the water are upside down. Thebranches go downward and the roots upward. Similarly, this materialworld is a reflection of the spiritual world. The material world is buta shadow of reality. In the shadow there is no reality orsubstantiality, but from the shadow we can understand that there issubstance and reality. In the desert there is no water, but the miragesuggests that there is such a thing as water. In the material worldthere is no water, there is no happiness, but the real water of actualhappiness is there in the spiritual world.
The Lord suggests that we attain the spiritual world in the following
manner (Bg. 15.5):
nirmana-moha jita-sanga-dosa
adhyatma-nitya vinivrtta-kamah
dvandvair vimuktah sukha-duhkha-samjnair
gacchanty amudhah padam avyayam tat
That padam avyayam or eternal kingdom can be reached by one who isnirmana-moha. What does this mean? We are after designations. Someonewants to become "sir," someone wants to become "lord," someone wants tobecome the president or a rich man or a king or something else. As longas we are attached to these designations, we are attached to the bodybecause designations belong to the body. But we are not these bodies,and realizing this is the first stage in spiritual realization. We areassociated with the three modes of material nature, but we must becomedetached through devotional service to the Lord. If we are not attachedto devotional service to the Lord, then we cannot become detached fromthe modes of material nature. Designations and attachments are due toour lust and desire, our wanting to lord it over the material nature.As long as we do not give up this propensity of lording it overmaterial nature, there is no possibility of returning to the kingdom ofthe Supreme, the sanatana-dhama. That eternal kingdom, which is neverdestroyed, can be approached by one who is not bewildered by theattractions of false material enjoyments, who is situated in theservice of the Supreme Lord. One so situated can easily approach thatsupreme abode.
Elsewhere in the Gita (8.21) it is stated:
avyakto 'ksara ity uktas
tam ahuh paramam gatim
yam prapya na nivartante
tad dhama paramam mama
Avyakta means unmanifested. Not even all of the material world ismanifested before us. Our senses are so imperfect that we cannot evensee all of the stars within this material universe. In Vedic literaturewe can receive much information about all the planets, and we canbelieve it or not believe it. All of the important planets aredescribed in Vedic literatures, especially Srimad-Bhagavatam, and thespiritual world, which is beyond this material sky, is described asavyakta, unmanifested. One should desire and hanker after that supremekingdom, for when one attains that kingdom, he does not have to returnto this material world.
Next, one may raise the question of how one goes about approaching that
abode of the Supreme Lord. Information of this is given in the EighthChapter. It is said there:
anta-kale ca mam eva
smaran muktva kalevaram
yah prayati sa mad-bhavam
yati nasty atra samsayah
"Anyone who quits his body, at the end of life, remembering Me, attainsimmediately to My nature; and there is no doubt of this." (Bg. 8.5) Onewho thinks of Krsna at the time of his death goes to Krsna. One mustremember the form of Krsna; if he quits his body thinking of this form,he approaches the spiritual kingdom. Mad-bhavam refers to the supremenature of the Supreme Being. The Supreme Being is sac-cid-ananda-vigraha--eternal, full of knowledge and bliss. Our present body is notsac-cid-ananda. It is asat, not sat. It is not eternal; it isperishable. It is not cit, full of knowledge, but it is full ofignorance. We have no knowledge of the spiritual kingdom, nor do weeven have perfect knowledge of this material world where there are somany things unknown to us. The body is also nirananda; instead of beingfull of bliss it is full of misery. All of the miseries we experiencein the material world arise from the body, but one who leaves this bodythinking of the Supreme Personality of Godhead at once attains a sac-cid-ananda body, as is promised in the fifth verse of the Eight Chapterwhere Lord Krsna says, "He attains My nature."
The process of quitting this body and getting another body in the
material world is also organized. A man dies after it has been decidedwhat form of body he will have in the next life. Higher authorities,not the living entity himself, make this decision. According to ouractivities in this life, we either rise or sink. This life is apreparation for the next life. If we can prepare, therefore, in thislife to get promotion to the kingdom of God, then surely, afterquitting this material body, we will attain a spiritual body just likethe Lord's.
As explained before, there are different kinds of transcendentalists,
the brahma-vadi, paramatma-vadi, and the devotee, and, as mentioned, inthe brahmajyoti (spiritual sky) there are innumerable spiritualplanets. The number of these planets is far, far greater than all ofthe planets of this material world. This material world has beenapproximated as only one quarter of the creation (ekamsena sthito
jagat). In this material segment there are millions and billions of
universes with trillions of planets and suns, stars and moons. But thiswhole material creation is only a fragment of the total creation. Mostof the creation is in the spiritual sky. One who desires to merge intothe existence of the Supreme Brahman is at once transferred to thebrahmajyoti of the Supreme Lord and thus attains the spiritual sky. Thedevotee, who wants to enjoy the association of the Lord, enters intothe Vaikuntha planets, which are innumerable, and the Supreme Lord byHis plenary expansions as Narayana with four hands and with differentnames like Pradyumna, Aniruddha, Govinda, etc., associates with himthere. Therefore at the end of life the transcendentalists either thinkof the brahmajyoti, the Paramatma or the Supreme Personality of GodheadSri Krsna. In all cases they enter into the spiritual sky, but only thedevotee, or he who is in personal touch with the Supreme Lord, entersinto the Vaikuntha planets. The Lord further adds that of this "thereis no doubt." This must be believed firmly. We should not reject thatwhich does not tally with our imagination; our attitude should be thatof Arjuna: "I believe everything that You have said." Therefore whenthe Lord says that at the time of death whoever thinks of Him asBrahman or Paramatma or as the Personality of Godhead certainly entersinto the spiritual sky, there is no doubt about it. There is noquestion of disbelieving it.
The information on how to think of the Supreme Being at the time of
death is also given in the Gita (8.6):
yam yam vapi smaran bhavam
tyajaty ante kalevaram
tam tam evaiti kaunteya
sada tad-bhava-bhavitah
"In whatever condition one quits his present body, in his next life hewill attain to that state of being without fail." Material nature is adisplay of one of the energies of the Supreme Lord. In the Visnu Purana(6.7.61) the total energies of the Supreme Lord are delineated:
visnu-saktih para prokta
ksetra-jnakhya tatha para
avidya-karma-samjnanya
trtiya saktir isyate
The Supreme Lord has diverse and innumerable energies which are beyondour conception; however, great learned sages or liberated souls havestudied these energies and have analyzed them into three parts. All ofthe energies are of visnu-sakti, that is to say they are differentpotencies of Lord Visnu. That energy is para, transcendental. Livingentities also belong to the superior energy, as has already beenexplained. The other energies, or material energies, are in the mode ofignorance. At the time of death we can either remain in the inferiorenergy of this material world, or we can transfer to the energy of thespiritual world.
In life we are accustomed to thinking either of the material or the
spiritual energy. There are so many literatures which fill our thoughtswith the material energy--newspapers, magazines, novels, etc. Ourthinking, which is now absorbed in these literatures, must betransferred to the Vedic literatures. The great sages, therefore, havewritten so many Vedic literatures such as the Puranas, etc. The Puranas
are not imaginative; they are historical records. In the Caitanya-
caritamrta (Madhya 20.122) there is the following verse:
maya-mugdha jivera nahi svatah krsna-jnana
jivere krpaya kaila krsna veda-purana
The forgetful living entities or conditioned souls have forgotten theirrelationship with the Supreme Lord, and they are engrossed in thinkingof material activities. Just to transfer their thinking power to thespiritual sky, Krsna-dvaipayana Vyasa has given a great number of Vedicliteratures. First he divided the Vedas into four, then he explainedthem in the Puranas, and for less capable people he wrote theMahabharata. In the Mahabharata there is given the Bhagavad-gita. Thenall Vedic literature is summarized in the Vedanta-sutra, and for futureguidance he gave a natural commentation on the Vedanta-sutra, calledSrimad-Bhagavatam. We must always engage our minds in reading theseVedic literatures. Just as materialists engage their minds in readingnewspapers, magazines and so many materialistic literatures, we musttransfer our reading to these literatures which are given to us byVyasadeva; in that way it will be possible for us to remember theSupreme Lord at the time of death. That is the only way suggested bythe Lord, and He guarantees the result: "There is no doubt."
tasmat sarvesu kalesu
mam anusmara yudhya ca
mayy arpita-mano-buddhir
mam evaisyasy asamsayah
"Therefore, Arjuna, you should always think of Me, and at the same timeyou should continue your prescribed duty and fight. With your mind andactivities always fixed on Me and everything engaged in Me, you willattain to Me without any doubt." (Bg. 8.7)
He does not advise Arjuna to simply remember Him and give up his
occupation. No, the Lord never suggests anything impractical. In thismaterial world, in order to maintain the body one has to work. Humansociety is divided, according to work, into four divisions of socialorder--brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya, sudra. The brahmana class orintelligent class is working in one way, the ksatriya or administrativeclass is working in another way, and the mercantile class and thelaborers are all tending to their specific duties. In the humansociety, whether one is a laborer, merchant, warrior, administrator, orfarmer, or even if one belongs to the highest class and is a literaryman, a scientist or a theologian, he has to work in order to maintainhis existence. The Lord therefore tells Arjuna that he need not give uphis occupation, but while he is engaged in his occupation he shouldremember Krsna (mam anusmara). If he doesn't practice remembering Krsnawhile he is struggling for existence, then it will not be possible forhim to remember Krsna at the time of death. Lord Caitanya also advisesthis. He says, kirtaniyah sada harih: one should practice rememberingthe Lord by chanting the names of the Lord always. The names of theLord and the Lord are nondifferent. So Lord Krsna's instructions toArjuna to "remember Me" and Lord Caitanya's injunction to "always chantthe names of Lord Krsna" are the same instruction. There is nodifference, because Krsna and Krsna's name are nondifferent. In theabsolute status there is no difference between reference and referent.Therefore we have to practice remembering the Lord always, twenty-four
hours a day, by chanting His names and molding our life's activities in
such a way that we can remember Him always.
How is this possible? The acaryas give the following example. If a
married woman is attached to another man, or if a man has an attachmentfor a woman other than his wife, then the attachment is to beconsidered very strong. One with such an attachment is always thinkingof the loved one. The wife who is thinking of her lover is alwaysthinking of meeting him, even while she is carrying out her householdchores. In fact, she carries out her household work even more carefullyso her husband will not suspect her attachment. Similarly, we shouldalways remember the supreme lover, Sri Krsna, and at the same timeperform our material duties very nicely. A strong sense of love isrequired here. If we have a strong sense of love for the Supreme Lord,then we can discharge our duty and at the same time remember Him. Butwe have to develop that sense of love. Arjuna, for instance, was alwaysthinking of Krsna; he was the constant companion of Krsna, and at thesame time he was a warrior. Krsna did not advise him to give upfighting and go to the forest to meditate. When Lord Krsna delineatesthe yoga system to Arjuna, Arjuna says that the practice of this systemis not possible for him.
arjuna uvaca
yo 'yam yogas tvaya proktah
samyena madhusudana
etasyaham na pasyami
cancalatvat sthitim sthiram
"Arjuna said, O Madhusudana, the system of yoga which You havesummarized appears impractical and unendurable to me, for the mind isrestless and unsteady." (Bg. 6.33)
But the Lord says:
yoginam api sarvesam
mad-gatenantaratmana
sraddhavan bhajate yo mam
sa me yuktatamo matah
"Of all yogis, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshipingMe in transcendental loving service, is most intimately united with Mein yoga, and is the highest of all." (Bg. 6.47) So one who thinks ofthe Supreme Lord always is the greatest yogi, the supermost jnani, andthe greatest devotee at the same time. The Lord further tells Arjunathat as a ksatriya he cannot give up his fighting, but if Arjuna fightsremembering Krsna, then he will be able to remember Him at the time ofdeath. But one must be completely surrendered in the transcendentalloving service of the Lord.
We work not with our body, actually, but with our mind and
intelligence. So if the intelligence and the mind are always engaged inthe thought of the Supreme Lord, then naturally the senses are alsoengaged in His service. Superficially, at least, the activities of thesenses remain the same, but the consciousness is changed. The Bhagavad-gita teaches one how to absorb the mind and intelligence in the thoughtof the Lord. Such absorption will enable one to transfer himself to thekingdom of the Lord. If the mind is engaged in Krsna's service, thenthe senses are automatically engaged in His service. This is the art,
and this is also the secret of Bhagavad-gita: total absorption in the
thought of Sri Krsna.
Modern man has struggled very hard to reach the moon, but he has not
tried very hard to elevate himself spiritually. If one has fifty yearsof life ahead of him, he should engage that brief time in cultivatingthis practice of remembering the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thispractice is the devotional process of:
sravanam kirtanam visnoh
smaranam pada-sevanam
arcanam vandanam dasyam
sakhyam atma-nivedanam
(Srimad-Bhagavatam 7.5.23)
These nine processes, of which the easiest is sravanam, hearing
Bhagavad-gita from the realized person, will turn one to the thought ofthe Supreme Being. This will lead to nisala, remembering the SupremeLord, and will enable one, upon leaving the body, to attain a spiritualbody which is just fit for association with the Supreme Lord.
The Lord further says:
abhyasa-yoga-yuktena
cetasa nanya-gamina
paramam purusam divyam
yati parthanucintayan
"By practicing this remembering, without being deviated, thinking everof the Supreme Godhead, one is sure to achieve the planet of theDivine, the Supreme Personality, O son of Kunti." (Bg. 8.8)
This is not a very difficult process. However, one must learn it from
an experienced person, from one who is already in the practice. Themind is always flying to this and that, but one must always practiceconcentrating the mind on the form of the Supreme Lord, Sri Krsna, oron the sound of His name. The mind is naturally restless, going hitherand thither, but it can rest in the sound vibration of Krsna. One mustthus meditate on paramam purusam, the Supreme Person, and thus attainHim. The ways and the means for ultimate realization, ultimateattainment, are stated in the Bhagavad-gita, and the doors of thisknowledge are open for everyone. No one is barred out. All classes ofmen can approach the Lord by thinking of Him, for hearing and thinkingof Him is possible for everyone.
The Lord further says (Bg. 9.32-33):
mam hi partha vyapasritya
ye 'pi syuh papa-yonayah
striyo vaisyas tatha sudras
te 'pi yanti param gatim
kim punar brahmanah punya
bhakta rajarsayas tatha
anityam asukham lokam
imam prapya bhajasva mam
"O son of Prtha, anyone who will take shelter in Me, whether a woman,
or a merchant, or one born in a low family, can yet approach thesupreme destination. How much greater then are the brahmanas, therighteous, the devotees, and saintly Kings! In this miserable world,these are fixed in devotional service to the Lord."
Human beings even in the lower statuses of life (a merchant, a woman or
a laborer) can attain the Supreme. One does not need highly developedintelligence. The point is that anyone who accepts the principle ofbhakti-yoga and accepts the Supreme Lord as the summum bonum of life,as the highest target, the ultimate goal, can approach the Lord in thespiritual sky. If one adopts the principles enunciated in Bhagavad-gita, he can make his life perfect and make a perfect solution to allthe problems of life which arise out of the transient nature ofmaterial existence. This is the sum and substance of the entireBhagavad-gita.
In conclusion, Bhagavad-gita is a transcendental literature which one
should read very carefully. It is capable of saving one from all fear.
nehabhikrama-naso 'sti pratyavayo na vidyate
svalpam apy asya dharmasya trayate mahato bhayat
"In this endeavor there is no loss or diminution, and a littleadvancement on this path can protect one from the most dangerous typeof fear." (Bg. 2.40) If one reads Bhagavad-gita sincerely andseriously, then all of the reactions of his past misdeeds will notreact upon him. In the last portion of Bhagavad-gita (18.66), Lord SriKrsna proclaims:
sarva-dharman parityajya
mam ekam saranam vraja
aham tvam sarva-papebhyo
moksayisyami ma sucah
"Give up all varieties of religiousness, and just surrender unto Me;and in return I shall protect you from all sinful reactions. Therefore,you have nothing to fear." Thus the Lord takes all responsibility forone who surrenders unto Him, and He indemnifies all the reactions ofsin.
One cleanses himself daily by taking a bath in water, but one who takes
his bath only once in the sacred Ganges water of the Bhagavad-gitacleanses away all the dirt of material life. Because Bhagavad-gita isspoken by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one need not read anyother Vedic literature. One need only attentively and regularly hearand read Bhagavad-gita. In the present age, mankind is so absorbed withmundane activities that it is not possible to read all of the Vedicliteratures. But this is not necessary. This one book, Bhagavad-gita,will suffice because it is the essence of all Vedic literatures andbecause it is spoken by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is saidthat one who drinks the water of the Ganges certainly gets salvation,but what to speak of one who drinks the waters of Bhagavad-gita? Gitais the very nectar of the Mahabharata spoken by Visnu Himself, for LordKrsna is the original Visnu. It is nectar emanating from the mouth ofthe Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the Ganges is said to beemanating from the lotus feet of the Lord. Of course there is no
difference between the mouth and the feet of the Supreme Lord, but in
our position we can appreciate that the Bhagavad-gita is even moreimportant than the Ganges.
The Bhagavad-gita is just like a cow, and Lord Krsna, who is a cowherd
boy, is milking this cow. The milk is the essence of the Vedas, andArjuna is just like a calf. The wise men, the great sages and puredevotees, are to drink the nectarean milk of Bhagavad-gita.
In this present day, man is very eager to have one scripture, one God,
one religion, and one occupation. So let there be one common scripturefor the whole world--Bhagavad-gita. And let there be one God only forthe whole world--Sri Krsna. And one mantra only--Hare Krsna, HareKrsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, HareHare. And let there be one work only--the service of the SupremePersonality of Godhead.
THE DISCIPLIC SUCCESSION
Evam parampara-praptam imam rajarsayo viduh (Bhagavad-gita 4.2). This
Bhagavad-gita As It Is is received through this disciplic succession:
1. Krsna 17. Brahmanya Tirtha
2. Brahma 18. Vyasa Tirtha3. Narada 19. Laksmipati4. Vyasa 20. Madhavendra Puri5. Madhva 21. Isvara Puri, (Nityananda,
Advaita)
6. Padmanabha 22. Lord Caitanya7. Nrhari 23. Rupa, (Svarupa, Sanatana)8. Madhava 24. Raghunatha, Jiva9. Aksobhya 25. Krsnadasa10. Jaya Tirtha 26. Narottama11. Jnanasindhu 27. Visvanatha12. Dayanidhi 28. (Baladeva) Jagannatha13. Vidyanidhi 29. Bhaktivinoda14. Rajendra 30. Gaurakisora15. Jayadharma 31. Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati16. Purusottama 32. His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada
