this material life. For the gross materialist it is sufficient to know
that one has to end this materialistic way of life, but for persons whoare spiritually advanced, there is another life after thismaterialistic life. Before ending this life, if one fortunately becomesKrsna conscious, he at once attains the stage of brahma-nirvana. Thereis no difference between the kingdom of God and the devotional serviceof the Lord. Since both of them are on the absolute plane, to beengaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord is to haveattained the spiritual kingdom. In the material world there areactivities of sense gratification, whereas in the spiritual world thereare activities of Krsna consciousness. Attainment of Krsnaconsciousness even during this life is immediate attainment of Brahman,and one who is situated in Krsna consciousness has certainly alreadyentered into the kingdom of God.Brahman is just the opposite of matter. Therefore brahmi sthiti means"not on the platform of material activities." Devotional service of theLord is accepted in the Bhagavad-gita as the liberated stage (sa gunansamatityaitan brahma-bhuyaya kalpate). Therefore, brahmi sthiti isliberation from material bondage.Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura has summarized this Second Chapter of theBhagavad-gita as being the contents for the whole text. In theBhagavad-gita, the subject matters are karma-yoga, jnana-yoga, andbhakti-yoga. In the Second Chapter karma-yoga and jnana-yoga have beenclearly discussed, and a glimpse of bhakti-yoga has also been given, asthe contents for the complete text.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Second Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of its Contents.
Chapter 3
Karma-yoga
TEXT 1
arjuna uvaca
jyayasi cet karmanas temata buddhir janardanatat kim karmani ghore mamniyojayasi kesava
SYNONYMSarjunah--Arjuna; uvaca--said; jyayasi--speaking very highly; cet--
although; karmanah--than fruitive action; te--Your; mata--opinion;buddhih--intelligence; janardana--O Krsna; tat--therefore; kim--why;karmani--in action; ghore--ghastly; mam--me; niyojayasi--engaging me;kesava--O Krsna.
TRANSLATIONArjuna said: O Janardana, O Kesava, why do You urge me to engage in
this ghastly warfare, if You think that intelligence is better thanfruitive work?
PURPORTThe Supreme Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna has very elaborately
described the constitution of the soul in the previous chapter, with a
view to deliver His intimate friend Arjuna from the ocean of material
grief. And the path of realization has been recommended: buddhi-yoga,or Krsna consciousness. Sometimes Krsna consciousness is misunderstoodto be inertia, and one with such a misunderstanding often withdraws toa secluded place to become fully Krsna conscious by chanting the holyname of Lord Krsna. But without being trained in the philosophy ofKrsna consciousness, it is not advisable to chant the holy name ofKrsna in a secluded place, where one may acquire only cheap adorationfrom the innocent public. Arjuna also thought of Krsna consciousness orbuddhi-yoga, or intelligence in spiritual advancement of knowledge, assomething like retirement from active life and the practice of penanceand austerity at a secluded place. In other words, he wanted toskillfully avoid the fighting by using Krsna consciousness as anexcuse. But as a sincere student, he placed the matter before hismaster and questioned Krsna as to his best course of action. In answer,Lord Krsna elaborately explained karma-yoga, or work in Krsnaconsciousness, in this Third Chapter.
TEXT 2
vyamisreneva vakyena
buddhim mohayasiva metad ekam vada niscityayena sreyo 'ham apnuyam
SYNONYMSvyamisrena--by equivocal; iva--as; vakyena--words; buddhim--
intelligence; mohayasi--bewildering; iva--as; me--my; tat--therefore;ekam--only one; vada--please tell; niscitya--ascertaining; yena--bywhich; sreyah--real benefit; aham--I; apnuyam--may have it.
TRANSLATIONMy intelligence is bewildered by Your equivocal instructions.
Therefore, please tell me decisively what is most beneficial for me.
PURPORTIn the previous chapter, as a prelude to the Bhagavad-gita, many
different paths were explained, such as sankhya-yoga, buddhi-yoga,control of the senses by intelligence, work without fruitive desire,and the position of the neophyte. This was all presentedunsystematically. A more organized outline of the path would benecessary for action and understanding. Arjuna, therefore, wanted toclear up these apparently confusing matters so that any common mancould accept them without misinterpretation. Although Krsna had nointention of confusing Arjuna by any jugglery of words, Arjuna couldnot follow the process of Krsna consciousness--either by inertia oractive service. In other words, by his questions he is clearing thepath of Krsna consciousness for all students who seriously want tounderstand the mystery of the Bhagavad-gita.
TEXT 3
sri-bhagavan uvaca
loke 'smin dvi-vidha nisthapura prokta mayanagha
jnana-yogena sankhyanam
karma-yogena yoginam
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; loke--in
the world; asmin--this; dvi-vidha--two kinds of; nistha--faith; pura--formerly; prokta--were said; maya--by Me; anagha--O sinless one; jnana-yogena--by the linking process of knowledge; sankhyanam--of the empiricphilosophers; karma-yogena--by the linking process of devotion;yoginam--of the devotees.
TRANSLATIONThe Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O sinless Arjuna, I have
already explained that there are two classes of men who try to realizethe self. Some are inclined to understand Him by empirical,philosophical speculation, and others are inclined to know Him bydevotional work.
PURPORTIn the Second Chapter, verse 39, the Lord explained two kinds of
procedures--namely sankhya-yoga and karma-yoga, or buddhi-yoga. In thisverse, the Lord explains the same more clearly. Sankhya-yoga, or theanalytical study of the nature of spirit and matter, is the subjectmatter for persons who are inclined to speculate and understand thingsby experimental knowledge and philosophy. The other class of men workin Krsna consciousness, as it is explained in the 61st verse of theSecond Chapter. The Lord has explained, also in the 39th verse, that byworking by the principles of buddhi-yoga, or Krsna consciousness, onecan be relieved from the bonds of action; and, furthermore, there is noflaw in the process. The same principle is more clearly explained inthe 61st verse--that this buddhi-yoga is to depend entirely on theSupreme (or more specifically, on Krsna), and in this way all thesenses can be brought under control very easily. Therefore, both theyogas are interdependent, as religion and philosophy. Religion withoutphilosophy is sentiment, or sometimes fanaticism, while philosophywithout religion is mental speculation. The ultimate goal is Krsna,because the philosophers who are also sincerely searching after theAbsolute Truth come in the end to Krsna consciousness. This is alsostated in the Bhagavad-gita. The whole process is to understand thereal position of the self in relation to the Superself. The indirectprocess is philosophical speculation, by which, gradually, one may cometo the point of Krsna consciousness; and the other process is directlyconnecting with everything in Krsna consciousness. Of these two, thepath of Krsna consciousness is better because it does not depend onpurifying the senses by a philosophical process. Krsna consciousness isitself the purifying process, and by the direct method of devotionalservice it is simultaneously easy and sublime.
TEXT 4
na karmanam anarambhan
naiskarmyam puruso 'snutena ca sannyasanad evasiddhim samadhigacchati
SYNONYMS
na--without; karmanam--of the prescribed duties; anarambhat--
nonperformance; naiskarmyam--freedom from reaction; purusah--man;asnute--achieve; na--nor; ca--also; sannyasanat--by renunciation; eva--simply; siddhim--success; samadhigacchati--attain.
TRANSLATIONNot by merely abstaining from work can one achieve freedom from
reaction, nor by renunciation alone can one attain perfection.
PURPORTThe renounced order of life can be accepted upon being purified by the
discharge of the prescribed form of duties which are laid down just topurify the hearts of materialistic men. Without purification, onecannot attain success by abruptly adopting the fourth order of life(sannyasa). According to the empirical philosophers, simply by adoptingsannyasa, or retiring from fruitive activities, one at once becomes asgood as Narayana. But Lord Krsna does not approve this principle.Without purification of heart, sannyasa is simply a disturbance to thesocial order. On the other hand, if someone takes to the transcendentalservice of the Lord, even without discharging his prescribed duties,whatever he may be able to advance in the cause is accepted by the Lord(buddhi-yoga). Sv-alpam apy asya dharmasya trayate mahato bhayat. Evena slight performance of such a principle enables one to overcome greatdifficulties.
TEXT 5
na hi kascit ksanam api
jatu tisthaty akarma-krtkaryate hy avasah karmasarvah prakrti-jair gunaih
SYNONYMSna--nor; hi--certainly; kascit--anyone; ksanam--even a moment; api--
also; jatu--even; tisthati--stands; akarma-krt--without doingsomething; karyate--forced to work; hi--certainly; avasah--helplessly;karma--work; sarvah--everything; prakrti-jaih--out of the modes ofmaterial nature; gunaih--by the qualities.
TRANSLATIONAll men are forced to act helplessly according to the impulses born of
the modes of material nature; therefore no one can refrain from doingsomething, not even for a moment.
PURPORTIt is not a question of embodied life, but it is the nature of the soul
to be always active. Without the presence of the spirit soul, thematerial body cannot move. The body is only a dead vehicle to be workedby the spirit soul, which is always active and cannot stop even for amoment. As such, the spirit soul has to be engaged in the good work ofKrsna consciousness, otherwise it will be engaged in occupations
dictated by illusory energy. In contact with material energy, the
spirit soul acquires material modes, and to purify the soul from suchaffinities it is necessary to engage in the prescribed duties enjoinedin the sastras. But if the soul is engaged in his natural function ofKrsna consciousness, whatever he is able to do is good for him. TheSrimad-Bhagavatam (1.5.17) affirms this:
tyaktva sva-dharmam caranambujam harer
bhajann apakvo 'tha patet tato yadiyatra kva vabhadram abhud amusya kimko vartha apto 'bhajatam sva-dharmatah
"If someone takes to Krsna consciousness, even though he may not follow
the prescribed duties in the sastras nor execute the devotional serviceproperly, and even though he may fall down from the standard, there isno loss or evil for him. But if he carries out all the injunctions forpurification in the sastras, what does it avail him if he is not Krsnaconscious?" So the purificatory process is necessary for reaching thispoint of Krsna consciousness. Therefore, sannyasa, or any purificatoryprocess, is to help reach the ultimate goal of becoming Krsnaconscious, without which everything is considered a failure.
TEXT 6
karmendriyani samyamya
ya aste manasa smaranindriyarthan vimudhatmamithyacarah sa ucyate
SYNONYMSkarma-indriyani--the five working sense organs; samyamya--controlling;
yah--anyone who; aste--remains; manasa--by mind; smaran--thinking;indriya-arthan--sense objects; vimudha--foolish; atma--soul; mithya-acarah--pretender; sah--he; ucyate--is called.
TRANSLATION
One who restrains the senses and organs of action, but whose mind
dwells on sense objects, certainly deludes himself and is called apretender.
PURPORTThere are many pretenders who refuse to work in Krsna consciousness but
make a show of meditation, while actually dwelling within the mind uponsense enjoyment. Such pretenders may also speak on dry philosophy inorder to bluff sophisticated followers, but according to this versethese are the greatest cheaters. For sense enjoyment one can act in anycapacity of the social order, but if one follows the rules andregulations of his particular status, he can make gradual progress inpurifying his existence. But he who makes a show of being a yogi, whileactually searching for the objects of sense gratification, must becalled the greatest cheater, even though he sometimes speaks ofphilosophy. His knowledge has no value because the effects of such asinful man's knowledge are taken away by the illusory energy of the
Lord. Such a pretender's mind is always impure, and therefore his show
of yogic meditation has no value whatsoever.
TEXT 7
yas tv indriyani manasa
niyamyarabhate 'rjunakarmendriyaih karma-yogamasaktah sa visisyate
SYNONYMSyah--one who; tu--but; indriyani--senses; manasa--by the mind; niyamya-
-regulating; arabhate--begins; arjuna--O Arjuna; karma-indriyaih--bythe active sense organs; karma-yogam--devotion; asaktah--withoutattachment; sah--he; visisyate--by far the better.
TRANSLATIONOn the other hand, he who controls the senses by the mind and engages
his active organs in works of devotion, without attachment, is by farsuperior.
PURPORTInstead of becoming a pseudo-transcendentalist for the sake of wanton
living and sense enjoyment, it is far better to remain in one's ownbusiness and execute the purpose of life, which is to get free frommaterial bondage and enter into the kingdom of God. The prime svartha-gati, or goal of self-interest, is to reach Visnu. The wholeinstitution of varna and asrama is designed to help us reach this goalof life. A householder can also reach this destination by regulatedservice in Krsna consciousness. For self-realization, one can live acontrolled life, as prescribed in the sastras, and continue carryingout his business without attachment, and in that way make progress.Such a sincere person who follows this method is far better situatedthan the false pretender who adopts show-bottle spiritualism to cheatthe innocent public. A sincere sweeper in the street is far better thanthe charlatan meditator who meditates only for the sake of making aliving.
TEXT 8
niyatam kuru karma tvam
karma jyayo hy akarmanahsarira-yatrapi ca tena prasiddhyed akarmanah
SYNONYMSniyatam--prescribed; kuru--do; karma--duties; tvam--you; karma--work;
jyayah--better; hi--than; akarmanah--without work; sarira--bodily;yatra--maintenance; api--even; ca--also; te--your; na--never;prasiddhyet--effected; akarmanah--without work.
TRANSLATION
Perform your prescribed duty, for action is better than inaction. A man
cannot even maintain his physical body without work.
PURPORTThere are many pseudo-meditators who misrepresent themselves as
belonging to high parentage, and great professional men who falselypose that they have sacrificed everything for the sake of advancementin spiritual life. Lord Krsna did not want Arjuna to become apretender, but that he perform his prescribed duties as set forth forksatriyas. Arjuna was a householder and a military general, andtherefore it was better for him to remain as such and perform hisreligious duties as prescribed for the householder ksatriya. Suchactivities gradually cleanse the heart of a mundane man and free himfrom material contamination. So-called renunciation for the purpose ofmaintenance is never approved by the Lord, nor by any religiousscripture. After all, one has to maintain one's body and soul togetherby some work. Work should not be given up capriciously, withoutpurification of materialistic propensities. Anyone who is in thematerial world is certainly possessed of the impure propensity forlording it over material nature, or, in other words, for sensegratification. Such polluted propensities have to be cleared. Withoutdoing so, through prescribed duties, one should never attempt to becomea so-called transcendentalist, renouncing work and living at the costof others.
TEXT 9
yajnarthat karmano 'nyatra
loko 'yam karma-bandhanahtad-artham karma kaunteyamukta-sangah samacara
SYNONYMSyajna-arthat--only for the sake of Yajna, or Visnu; karmanah--work
done; anyatra--otherwise; lokah--this world; ayam--this; karma-bandhanah--bondage by work; tat--Him; artham--for the sake; karma--work; kaunteya--O son of Kunti; mukta-sangah--liberated fromassociation; samacara--do perfectly.
TRANSLATIONWork done as a sacrifice for Visnu has to be performed, otherwise work
binds one to this material world. Therefore, O son of Kunti, performyour prescribed duties for His satisfaction, and in that way you willalways remain unattached and free from bondage.
PURPORTSince one has to work even for the simple maintenance of the body, the
prescribed duties for a particular social position and quality are somade that that purpose can be fulfilled. Yajna means Lord Visnu, orsacrificial performances. All sacrificial performances also are meantfor the satisfaction of Lord Visnu. The Vedas enjoin: yajno vai visnuh.In other words, the same purpose is served whether one performsprescribed yajnas or directly serves Lord Visnu. Krsna consciousness istherefore performance of yajna as it is prescribed in this verse. The
varnasrama institution also aims at this for satisfying Lord Visnu.
Varnasramacaravata purusena parah puman. visnur aradhyate (Visnu Purana3.8.8). Therefore one has to work for the satisfaction of Visnu. Anyother work done in this material world will be a cause of bondage, forboth good and evil work have their reactions, and any reaction bindsthe performer. Therefore, one has to work in Krsna consciousness tosatisfy Krsna (or Visnu); and while performing such activities one isin a liberated stage. This is the great art of doing work, and in thebeginning this process requires very expert guidance. One shouldtherefore act very diligently, under the expert guidance of a devoteeof Lord Krsna, or under the direct instruction of Lord Krsna Himself(under whom Arjuna had the opportunity to work). Nothing should beperformed for sense gratification, but everything should be done forthe satisfaction of Krsna. This practice will not only save one fromthe reaction of work, but will also gradually elevate one totranscendental loving service of the Lord, which alone can raise one tothe kingdom of God.
TEXT 10
saha-yajnah prajah srstva
purovaca prajapatihanena prasavisyadhvamesa vo 'stv ista-kama-dhuk
SYNONYMSsaha--along with; yajnah--sacrifices; prajah--generations; srstva--
creating; pura--anciently; uvaca--said; praja-patih--the Lord ofcreatures; anena--by this; prasavisyadhvam--be more and moreprosperous; esah--certainly; vah--your; astu--let it be; ista--alldesirable; kama-dhuk--bestower.
TRANSLATIONIn the beginning of creation, the Lord of all creatures sent forth
generations of men and demigods, along with sacrifices for Visnu, andblessed them by saying, "Be thou happy by this yajna [sacrifice]because its performance will bestow upon you all desirable things."
PURPORTThe material creation by the Lord of creatures (Visnu) is a chance
offered to the conditioned souls to come back home--back to Godhead.All living entities within the material creation are conditioned bymaterial nature because of their forgetfulness of their relationship toKrsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Vedic principles are tohelp us understand this eternal relation, as it is stated in theBhagavad-gita: vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah. The Lord says thatthe purpose of the Vedas is to understand Him. In the Vedic hymns it issaid: patim visvasyatmesvaram. Therefore, the Lord of the livingentities is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam also (2.4.20) Srila Sukadeva Gosvami describes the Lord aspati in so many ways:
sriyah patir yajna-patih praja-patir
dhiyam patir loka-patir dhara-patihpatir gatis candhaka-vrsni-satvatam
prasidatam me bhagavan satam patih
The praja-pati is Lord Visnu, and He is the Lord of all living
creatures, all worlds, and all beauties, and the protector of everyone.The Lord created this material world for the conditioned souls to learnhow to perform yajnas (sacrifices) for the satisfaction of Visnu, sothat while in the material world they can live very comfortably withoutanxiety and after finishing the present material body, they can enterinto the kingdom of God. That is the whole program for the conditionedsoul. By performance of yajna, the conditioned souls gradually becomeKrsna conscious and become godly in all respects. In the Age of Kali,the sankirtana-yajna (the chanting of the names of God) is recommendedby the Vedic scriptures, and this transcendental system was introducedby Lord Caitanya for the deliverance of all men in this age.Sankirtana-yajna and Krsna consciousness go well together. Lord Krsnain His devotional form (as Lord Caitanya) is mentioned in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.5.32) as follows, with special reference to thesankirtana-yajna:
krsna-varnam tvisakrsnam
sangopangastra-parsadamyajnaih sankirtana-prayairyajanti hi su-medhasah
"In this Age of Kali, people who are endowed with sufficient
intelligence will worship the Lord, who is accompanied by Hisassociates, by performance of sankirtana-yajna." Other yajnasprescribed in the Vedic literatures are not easy to perform in this Ageof Kali, but the sankirtana-yajna is easy and sublime for all purposes.
TEXT 11
devan bhavayatanena
te deva bhavayantu vahparasparam bhavayantahsreyah param avapsyatha
SYNONYMSdevan--demigods; bhavayata--having pleased; anena--by this sacrifice;
te--those; devah--the demigods; bhavayantu--will please; vah--you;parasparam--mutual; bhavayantah--pleasing one another; sreyah--benediction; param--the supreme; avapsyatha--do you achieve.
TRANSLATIONThe demigods, being pleased by sacrifices, will also please you; thus
nourishing one another, there will reign general prosperity for all.
PURPORTThe demigods are empowered administrators of material affairs. The
supply of air, light, water and all other benedictions for maintainingthe body and soul of every living entity are entrusted to the demigods,who are innumerable assistants in different parts of the body of theSupreme Personality of Godhead. Their pleasures and displeasures aredependent on the performance of yajnas by the human being. Some of theyajnas are meant to satisfy particular demigods; but even in so doing,
Lord Visnu is worshiped in all yajnas as the chief beneficiary. It is
stated also in the Bhagavad-gita that Krsna Himself is the beneficiaryof all kinds of yajnas: bhoktaram yajna-tapasam. Therefore, ultimatesatisfaction of the yajna-pati is the chief purpose of all yajnas. Whenthese yajnas are perfectly performed, naturally the demigods in chargeof the different departments of supply are pleased, and there is noscarcity in the supply of natural products.Performance of yajnas has many side benefits, ultimately leading toliberation from the material bondage. By performance of yajnas, allactivities become purified, as it is stated in the Vedas:
ahara-suddhau sattva-suddhih sattva-suddhau
dhruva smrtih smrti-lambhe sarvagranthinam vipramoksah
As it will be explained in the following verses, by performance of
yajna one's eatables become sanctified, and by eating sanctifiedfoodstuffs one's very existence becomes purified; by the purificationof existence, finer tissues in memory become sanctified, and whenmemory is sanctified, one can think of the path of liberation, and allthese combined together lead to Krsna consciousness, the greatnecessity of present-day society.
TEXT 12
istan bhogan hi vo deva
dasyante yajna-bhavitahtair dattan apradayaibhyoyo bhunkte stena eva sah
SYNONYMSistan--desired; bhogan--necessities of life; hi--certainly; vah--unto
you; devah--the demigods; dasyante--award; yajna-bhavitah--beingsatisfied by the performance of sacrifices; taih--by them; dattan--things given; apradaya--without offering; ebhyah--to the demigods; yah--he who; bhunkte--enjoys; stenah--thief; eva--certainly; sah--is he.
TRANSLATIONIn charge of the various necessities of life, the demigods, being
satisfied by the performance of yajna [sacrifice], supply allnecessities to man. But he who enjoys these gifts without offering themto the demigods in return is certainly a thief.
PURPORTThe demigods are authorized supplying agents on behalf of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Visnu. Therefore, they must be satisfied by theperformance of prescribed yajnas. In the Vedas, there are differentkinds of yajnas prescribed for different kinds of demigods, but all areultimately offered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For one whocannot understand what the Personality of Godhead is, sacrifice to thedemigods is recommended. According to the different material qualitiesof the persons concerned, different types of yajnas are recommended inthe Vedas. Worship of different demigods is also on the same basis--namely, according to different qualities. For example, the meat-eatersare recommended to worship the goddess Kali, the ghastly form ofmaterial nature, and before the goddess the sacrifice of animals is
recommended. But for those who are in the mode of goodness, the
transcendental worship of Visnu is recommended. But ultimately, allyajnas are meant for gradual promotion to the transcendental position.For ordinary men, at least five yajnas, known as panca-maha-yajna, arenecessary.One should know, however, that all the necessities of life that thehuman society requires are supplied by the demigod agents of the Lord.No one can manufacture anything. Take, for example, all the eatables ofhuman society. These eatables include grains, fruits, vegetables, milk,sugar, etc., for persons in the mode of goodness, and also eatables forthe non-vegetarians, like meats, etc., none of which can bemanufactured by men. Then again, take for example heat, light, water,air, etc., which are also necessities of life--none of them can bemanufactured by the human society. Without the Supreme Lord, there canbe no profuse sunlight, moonlight, rainfall, breeze, etc., withoutwhich no one can live. Obviously, our life is dependent on suppliesfrom the Lord. Even for our manufacturing enterprises, we require somany raw materials like metal, sulphur, mercury, manganese, and so manyessentials--all of which are supplied by the agents of the Lord, withthe purpose that we should make proper use of them to keep ourselvesfit and healthy for the purpose of self-realization, leading to theultimate goal of life, namely, liberation from the material strugglefor existence. This aim of life is attained by performance of yajnas.If we forget the purpose of human life and simply take supplies fromthe agents of the Lord for sense gratification and become more and moreentangled in material existence, which is not the purpose of creation,certainly we become thieves, and therefore we are punished by the lawsof material nature. A society of thieves can never be happy becausethey have no aim in life. The gross materialist thieves have noultimate goal of life. They are simply directed to sense gratification;nor do they have knowledge of how to perform yajnas. Lord Caitanya,however, inaugurated the easiest performance of yajna, namely thesankirtana-yajna, which can be performed by anyone in the world whoaccepts the principles of Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 13
yajna-sistasinah santo
mucyante sarva-kilbisaihbhunjate te tv agham papaye pacanty atma-karanat
SYNONYMSyajna-sista--food taken after performance of yajna; asinah--eaters;
santah--the devotees; mucyante--get relief from; sarva--all kinds of;kilbisaih--from sins; bhunjate--enjoy; te--they; tu--but; agham--grievous sins; papah--sinners; ye--those; pacanti--prepare food; atma-karanat--for sense enjoyment.
TRANSLATIONThe devotees of the Lord are released from all kinds of sins because
they eat food which is offered first for sacrifice. Others, who preparefood for personal sense enjoyment, verily eat only sin.
PURPORT
The devotees of the Supreme Lord, or the persons who are in Krsna
consciousness, are called santas, and they are always in love with theLord as it is described in the Brahma-samhita (5.38): premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti. Thesantas, being always in a compact of love with the Supreme Personalityof Godhead, Govinda (the giver of all pleasures), or Mukunda (the giverof liberation), or Krsna (the all-attractive person), cannot acceptanything without first offering it to the Supreme Person. Therefore,such devotees always perform yajnas in different modes of devotionalservice, such as sravanam, kirtanam, smaranam, arcanam, etc., and theseperformances of yajnas keep them always aloof from all kinds ofcontamination of sinful association in the material world. Others, whoprepare food for self or sense gratification, are not only thieves, butare also the eaters of all kinds of sins. How can a person be happy ifhe is both a thief and sinful? It is not possible. Therefore, in orderfor people to become happy in all respects, they must be taught toperform the easy process of sankirtana-yajna, in full Krsnaconsciousness. Otherwise, there can be no peace or happiness in theworld.
TEXT 14
annad bhavanti bhutani
parjanyad anna-sambhavahyajnad bhavati parjanyoyajnah karma-samudbhavah
SYNONYMSannat--from grains; bhavanti--grow; bhutani--the material bodies;
parjanyat--from rains; anna--of food grains; sambhavah--are madepossible; yajnat--from the performance of sacrifice; bhavati--becomespossible; parjanyah--rains; yajnah--performance of yajna; karma--prescribed duties; samudbhavah--born of.
TRANSLATIONAll living bodies subsist on food grains, which are produced from
rains. Rains are produced by performance of yajna [sacrifice], andyajna is born of prescribed duties.
PURPORTSrila Baladeva Vidyabhusana, a great commentator on the Bhagavad-gita,
writes as follows: ye indrady-angatayavasthitam yajnam sarvesvaramvisnum abhyarcya tac-chesam asnanti tena tad deha-yatram sampadayanti,te santah sarvesvarasya yajna-purusasya bhaktah sarva-kilbisair anadi-kala-vivrddhair atmanubhava-prati bandhakair nikhilaih papairvimucyante. The Supreme Lord, who is known as the yajna-purusa, or thepersonal beneficiary of all sacrifices, is the master of all demigods,who serve Him as the different limbs of the body serve the whole.Demigods like Indra, Candra, Varuna, etc., are appointed officers whomanage material affairs, and the Vedas direct sacrifices to satisfythese demigods so that they may be pleased to supply air, light andwater sufficiently to produce food grains. When Lord Krsna isworshiped, the demigods, who are different limbs of the Lord, are alsoautomatically worshiped; therefore there is no separate need to worshipthe demigods. For this reason, the devotees of the Lord, who are in
Krsna consciousness, offer food to Krsna and then eat--a process which
nourishes the body spiritually. By such action not only are past sinfulreactions in the body vanquished, but the body becomes immunized to allcontamination of material nature. When there is an epidemic disease, anantiseptic vaccine protects a person from the attack of such anepidemic. Similarly, food offered to Lord Visnu and then taken by usmakes us sufficiently resistant to material affection, and one who isaccustomed to this practice is called a devotee of the Lord. Therefore,a person in Krsna consciousness, who eats only food offered to Krsna,can counteract all reactions of past material infections, which areimpediments to the progress of self-realization. On the other hand, onewho does not do so continues to increase the volume of sinful action,and this prepares the next body to resemble hogs and dogs, to sufferthe resultant reactions of all sins. The material world is full ofcontaminations, and one who is immunized by accepting prasadam of theLord (food offered to Visnu) is saved from the attack, whereas one whodoes not do so becomes subjected to contamination.Food grains or vegetables are factually eatables. The human being eatsdifferent kinds of food grains, vegetables, fruits, etc., and theanimals eat the refuse of the food grains and vegetables, grass,plants, etc. Human beings who are accustomed to eating meat and fleshmust also depend on the production of vegetation in order to eat theanimals. Therefore, ultimately, we have to depend on the production ofthe field and not on the production of big factories. The fieldproduction is due to sufficient rain from the sky, and such rains arecontrolled by demigods like Indra, sun, moon, etc., and they are allservants of the Lord. The Lord can be satisfied by sacrifices;therefore, one who cannot perform them will find himself in scarcity--that is the law of nature. Yajna, specifically the sankirtana-yajnaprescribed for this age, must therefore be performed to save us atleast from scarcity of food supply.
TEXT 15
karma brahmodbhavam viddhi
brahmaksara-samudbhavamtasmat sarva-gatam brahmanityam yajne pratisthitam
SYNONYMSkarma--work; brahma--Vedas; udbhavam--produced from; viddhi--one should
know; brahma--the Vedas; aksara--the Supreme Brahman (Personality ofGodhead); samudbhavam--directly manifested; tasmat--therefore; sarva-gatam--all-pervading; brahma--transcendence; nityam--eternally; yajne--in sacrifice; pratisthitam--situated.
TRANSLATIONRegulated activities are prescribed in the Vedas, and the Vedas are
directly manifested from the Supreme Personality of Godhead.Consequently the all-pervading Transcendence is eternally situated inacts of sacrifice.
PURPORTYajnartha-karma, or the necessity of work for the satisfaction of Krsna
only, is more expressly stated in this verse. If we have to work for
the satisfaction of the yajna-purusa, Visnu, then we must find out the
direction of work in Brahman, or the transcendental Vedas. The Vedasare therefore codes of working directions. Anything performed withoutthe direction of the Vedas is called vikarma, or unauthorized or sinfulwork. Therefore, one should always take direction from the Vedas to besaved from the reaction of work. As one has to work in ordinary life bythe direction of the state, similarly, one has to work under thedirection of the supreme state of the Lord. Such directions in theVedas are directly manifested from the breathing of the SupremePersonality of Godhead. It is said: asya mahato bhutasya nisvasitametad yad rg-vedo yajur-vedah samavedo 'tharvangirasah. "The four Vedas--namely the Rg Veda, Yajur Veda, Sama Veda and Atharva Veda--are allemanations from the breathing of the great Personality of Godhead."(Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 4.5.11) The Lord, being omnipotent, can speakby breathing air, as it is confirmed in the Brahma-samhita, for theLord has the omnipotence to perform through each of His senses theactions of all other senses. In other words, the Lord can speak throughHis breathing, and He can impregnate by His eyes. In fact, it is saidthat He glanced over material nature and thus fathered all livingentities. After creating or impregnating the conditioned souls in thewomb of material nature, He gave His directions in the Vedic wisdom asto how such conditioned souls can return home, back to Godhead. Weshould always remember that the conditioned souls in material natureare all eager for material enjoyment. But the Vedic directions are somade that one can satisfy one's perverted desires, then return toGodhead, having finished his so-called enjoyment. It is a chance forthe conditioned souls to attain liberation; therefore the conditionedsouls must try to follow the process of yajna by becoming Krsnaconscious. Even those who cannot follow the Vedic injunctions may adoptthe principles of Krsna consciousness, and that will take the place ofperformance of Vedic yajnas, or karmas.
TEXT 16
evam pravartitam cakram
nanuvartayatiha yahaghayur indriyaramomogham partha sa jivati
SYNONYMSevam--thus prescribed; pravartitam--established by the Vedas; cakram--
cycle; na--does not; anuvartayati--adopt; iha--in this life; yah--onewho; agha-ayuh--life full of sins; indriya-aramah--satisfied in sensegratification; mogham--useless; partha--O son of Prtha (Arjuna); sah--one who does so; jivati--lives.
TRANSLATIONMy dear Arjuna, a man who does not follow this prescribed Vedic system
of sacrifice certainly leads a life full of sin, for a persondelighting only in the senses lives in vain.
PURPORTThe mammonist philosophy of work very hard and enjoy sense
gratification is condemned herein by the Lord. Therefore, for those whowant to enjoy this material world, the above-mentioned cycle of
performing yajnas is absolutely necessary. One who does not follow such
regulations is living a very risky life, being condemned more and more.By nature's law, this human form of life is specifically meant forself-realization, in either of the three ways--namely karma-yoga,jnana-yoga or bhakti-yoga. There is no necessity of rigidly followingthe performances of the prescribed yajnas for the transcendentalistswho are above vice and virtue; but those who are engaged in sensegratification require purification by the above-mentioned cycle ofyajna performances. There are different kinds of activities. Those whoare not Krsna conscious are certainly engaged in sensory consciousness;therefore they need to execute pious work. The yajna system is plannedin such a way that sensory conscious persons may satisfy their desireswithout becoming entangled in the reactions of sense-gratificatorywork. The prosperity of the world depends not on our own efforts but onthe background arrangement of the Supreme Lord, directly carried out bythe demigods. Therefore, the yajnas are directly aimed at theparticular demigod mentioned in the Vedas. Indirectly, it is thepractice of Krsna consciousness, because when one masters theperformance of yajnas, one is sure to become Krsna conscious. But if byperforming yajnas one does not become Krsna conscious, such principlesare counted as only moral codes. One should not, therefore, limit hisprogress only to the point of moral codes, but should transcend them,to attain Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 17
yas tv atma-ratir eva syad
atma-trptas ca manavahatmany eva ca santustastasya karyam na vidyate
SYNONYMSyah--one who; tu--but; atma-ratih--takes pleasure; eva--certainly;
syat--remains; atma-trptah--self-illuminated; ca--and; manavah--a man;atmani--in himself; eva--only; ca--and; santustah--perfectly satiated;tasya--his; karyam--duty; na--does not; vidyate--exist.
TRANSLATIONOne who is, however, taking pleasure in the self, who is illuminated in
the self, who rejoices in and is satisfied with the self only, fullysatiated--for him there is no duty.
PURPORTA person who is fully Krsna conscious, and is fully satisfied by his
acts in Krsna consciousness, no longer has any duty to perform. Due tohis being Krsna conscious, all impiety within is instantly cleansed, aneffect of many, many thousands of yajna performances. By such clearingof consciousness, one becomes fully confident of his eternal positionin relationship with the Supreme. His duty thus becomes self-illuminated by the grace of the Lord, and therefore he no longer hasany obligations to the Vedic injunctions. Such a Krsna conscious personis no longer interested in material activities and no longer takespleasure in material arrangements like wine, women and similarinfatuations.
TEXT 18
naiva tasya krtenartho
nakrteneha kascanana casya sarva-bhutesukascid artha-vyapasrayah
SYNONYMSna--never; eva--certainly; tasya--his; krtena--by discharge of duty;
arthah--purpose; na--nor; akrtena--without discharge of duty; iha--inthis world; kascana--whatever; na--never; ca--and; asya--of him; sarva-bhutesu--in all living beings; kascit--any; artha--purpose;vyapasrayah--taking shelter of.
TRANSLATIONA self-realized man has no purpose to fulfill in the discharge of his
prescribed duties, nor has he any reason not to perform such work. Norhas he any need to depend on any other living being.
PURPORTA self-realized man is no longer obliged to perform any prescribed
duty, save and except activities in Krsna consciousness. Krsnaconsciousness is not inactivity either, as will be explained in thefollowing verses. A Krsna conscious man does not take shelter of anyperson--man or demigod. Whatever he does in Krsna consciousness issufficient in the discharge of his obligation.
TEXT 19
tasmad asaktah satatam
karyam karma samacaraasakto hy acaran karmaparam apnoti purusah
SYNONYMStasmat--therefore; asaktah--without attachment; satatam--constantly;
karyam--as duty; karma--work; samacara--perform; asaktah--nonattached;hi--certainly; acaran--performing; karma--work; param--the Supreme;apnoti--achieves; purusah--a man.
TRANSLATIONTherefore, without being attached to the fruits of activities, one
should act as a matter of duty; for by working without attachment oneattains the Supreme.
PURPORTThe Supreme is the Personality of Godhead for the devotees, and
liberation for the impersonalist. A person, therefore, acting forKrsna, or in Krsna consciousness, under proper guidance and withoutattachment to the result of the work, is certainly making progresstoward the supreme goal of life. Arjuna is told that he should fight inthe Battle of Kuruksetra for the interest of Krsna because Krsna wanted
him to fight. To be a good man or a nonviolent man is a personal
attachment, but to act on behalf of the Supreme is to act withoutattachment for the result. That is perfect action of the highestdegree, recommended by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna.Vedic rituals, like prescribed sacrifices, are performed forpurification of impious activities that were performed in the field ofsense gratification. But action in Krsna consciousness istranscendental to the reactions of good or evil work. A Krsna consciousperson has no attachment for the result but acts on behalf of Krsnaalone. He engages in all kinds of activities, but is completelynonattached.
TEXT 20
karmanaiva hi samsiddhim
asthita janakadayahloka-sangraham evapisampasyan kartum arhasi
SYNONYMSkarmana--by work; eva--even; hi--certainly; samsiddhim--perfection;
asthitah--situated; janaka-adayah--Janaka and other kings; loka-sangraham--educating the people in general; eva--also; api--for thesake of; sampasyan--by considering; kartum--to act; arhasi--deserve.
TRANSLATIONKings such as Janaka and others attained the perfectional stage by
performance of prescribed duties. Therefore, just for the sake ofeducating the people in general, you should perform your work.
PURPORTKings like Janaka and others were all self-realized souls; consequently
they had no obligation to perform the prescribed duties in the Vedas.Nonetheless they performed all prescribed activities just to setexamples for the people in general. Janaka was the father of Sita andfather-in-law of Lord Sri Rama. Being a great devotee of the Lord, hewas transcendentally situated, but because he was the king of Mithila(a subdivision of Bihar province in India), he had to teach hissubjects how to fight righteously in battle. He and his subjects foughtto teach people in general that violence is also necessary in asituation where good arguments fail. Before the Battle of Kuruksetra,every effort was made to avoid the war, even by the Supreme Personalityof Godhead, but the other party was determined to fight. So for such aright cause, there is a necessity for fighting. Although one who issituated in Krsna consciousness may not have any interest in the world,he still works to teach the public how to live and how to act.Experienced persons in Krsna consciousness can act in such a way thatothers will follow, and this is explained in the following verse.
TEXT 21
yad yad acarati sresthas
tat tad evetaro janahsa yat pramanam kurutelokas tad anuvartate
SYNONYMS
yat--whatever; yat--and whichever; acarati--does he act; sresthah--a
respectable leader; tat--that; tat--and that alone; eva--certainly;itarah--common; janah--person; sah--he; yat--whichever; pramanam--evidence; kurute--does perform; lokah--all the world; tat--that;anuvartate--follow in the footsteps.
TRANSLATIONWhatever action is performed by a great man, common men follow in his
footsteps. And whatever standards he sets by exemplary acts, all theworld pursues.
PURPORTPeople in general always require a leader who can teach the public by
practical behavior. A leader cannot teach the public to stop smoking ifhe himself smokes. Lord Caitanya said that a teacher should behaveproperly even before he begins teaching. One who teaches in that way iscalled acarya, or the ideal teacher. Therefore, a teacher must followthe principles of sastra (scripture) to reach the common man. Theteacher cannot manufacture rules against the principles of revealedscriptures. The revealed scriptures, like Manu-samhita and similarothers, are considered the standard books to be followed by humansociety. Thus the leader's teaching should be based on the principlesof such standard rules as they are practiced by the great teachers. TheSrimad-Bhagavatam also affirms that one should follow in the footstepsof great devotees, and that is the way of progress on the path ofspiritual realization. The king or the executive head of a state, thefather and the school teacher are all considered to be natural leadersof the innocent people in general. All such natural leaders have agreat responsibility to their dependents; therefore they must beconversant with standard books of moral and spiritual codes.
TEXT 22
na me parthasti kartavyam
trisu lokesu kincanananavaptam avaptavyamvarta eva ca karmani
SYNONYMSna--not; me--Mine; partha--O son of Prtha; asti--there is; kartavyam--
any prescribed duty; trisu--in the three; lokesu--planetary systems;kincana--anything; na--no; anavaptam--in want; avaptavyam--to begained; varte--engaged; eva--certainly; ca--also; karmani--in one'sprescribed duty.
TRANSLATIONO son of Prtha, there is no work prescribed for Me within all the three
planetary systems. Nor am I in want of anything, nor have I need toobtain anything--and yet I am engaged in work.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is described in the Vedic
literatures as follows:
tam isvaranam paramam mahesvaram
tam devatanam paramam ca daivatampatim patinam paramam parastadvidama devam bhuvanesam idyam
na tasya karyam karanam ca vidyate
na tat-samas cabhyadhikas ca drsyateparasya saktir vividhaiva sruyatesvabhaviki jnana-bala-kriya ca
"The Supreme Lord is the controller of all other controllers, and He is
the greatest of all the diverse planetary leaders. Everyone is underHis control. All entities are delegated with particular power only bythe Supreme Lord; they are not supreme themselves. He is alsoworshipable by all demigods and is the supreme director of alldirectors. Therefore, He is transcendental to all kinds of materialleaders and controllers and is worshipable by all. There is no onegreater than Him, and He is the supreme cause of all causes."He does not possess bodily form like that of an ordinary livingentity. There is no difference between His body and His soul. He isabsolute. All His senses are transcendental. Any one of His senses canperform the action of any other sense. Therefore no one is greater thanHim or equal to Him. His potencies are multifarious, and thus His deedsare automatically performed as a natural sequence." (SvetasvataraUpanisad 6.7-8)Since everything is in full opulence in the Personality of Godhead andis existing in full truth, there is no duty for the Supreme Personalityof Godhead to perform. One who must receive the results of work hassome designated duty, but one who has nothing to achieve within thethree planetary systems certainly has no duty. And yet Lord Krsna isengaged on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra as the leader of the ksatriyasbecause the ksatriyas are duty-bound to give protection to thedistressed. Although He is above all the regulations of the revealedscriptures, He does not do anything that violates the revealedscriptures.
TEXT 23
yadi hy aham na varteyam
jatu karmany atandritahmama vartmanuvartantemanusyah partha sarvasah
SYNONYMSyadi--if; hi--certainly; aham--I; na--do not; varteyam--thus engage;
jatu--ever; karmani--in the performance of prescribed duties;atandritah--with great care; mama--My; vartma--path; anuvartante--wouldfollow; manusyah--all men; partha--O son of Prtha; sarvasah--in allrespects.
TRANSLATION
For if I did not engage in work, O Partha, certainly all men would
follow My path.
PURPORTIn order to keep the balance of social tranquillity for progress in
spiritual life, there are traditional family usages meant for everycivilized man. Although such rules and regulations are for theconditioned souls and not Lord Krsna, because He descended to establishthe principles of religion, He followed the prescribed rules.Otherwise, common men would follow in His footsteps, because He is thegreatest authority. From the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is understood thatLord Krsna was performing all the religious duties at home and out ofhome, as required of a householder.
TEXT 24
utsideyur ime loka
na kuryam karma ced ahamsankarasya ca karta syamupahanyam imah prajah
SYNONYMSutsideyuh--put into ruin; ime--all these; lokah--worlds; na--do not;
kuryam--perform; karma--prescribed duties; cet--if; aham--I;sankarasya--of unwanted population; ca--and; karta--creator; syam--shall be; upahanyam--destroy; imah--all these; prajah--living entities.
TRANSLATIONIf I should cease to work, then all these worlds would be put to
ruination. I would also be the cause of creating unwanted population,and I would thereby destroy the peace of all sentient beings.
PURPORTVarna-sankara is unwanted population which disturbs the peace of the
general society. In order to check this social disturbance, there areprescribed rules and regulations by which the population canautomatically become peaceful and organized for spiritual progress inlife. When Lord Krsna descends, naturally He deals with such rules andregulations in order to maintain the prestige and necessity of suchimportant performances. The Lord is the father of all living entities,and if the living entities are misguided, indirectly the responsibilitygoes to the Lord. Therefore, whenever there is general disregard ofregulative principles, the Lord Himself descends and corrects thesociety. We should, however, note carefully that although we have tofollow in the footsteps of the Lord, we still have to remember that wecannot imitate Him. Following and imitating are not on the same level.We cannot imitate the Lord by lifting Govardhana Hill, as the Lord didin His childhood. It is impossible for any human being. We have tofollow His instructions, but we may not imitate Him at any time. TheSrimad-Bhagavatam (10.33.30-31) affirms:
naitat samacarej jatu
manasapi hy anisvarahvinasyaty acaran maudhyad
yatha 'rudro 'bdhi-jam visam
isvaranam vacah satyam
tathaivacaritam kvacittesam yat sva-vaco-yuktambuddhimams tat samacaret
"One should simply follow the instructions of the Lord and His
empowered servants. Their instructions are all good for us, and anyintelligent person will perform them as instructed. However, one shouldguard against trying to imitate their actions. One should not try todrink the ocean of poison in imitation of Lord Siva."We should always consider the position of the isvaras, or those who canactually control the movements of the sun and moon, as superior.Without such power, one cannot imitate the isvaras, who aresuperpowerful. Lord Siva drank poison to the extent of swallowing anocean, but if any common man tries to drink even a fragment of suchpoison, he will be killed. There are many pseudo-devotees of Lord Sivawho want to indulge in smoking ganja (marijuana) and similarintoxicating drugs, forgetting that by so imitating the acts of LordSiva they are calling death very near. Similarly, there are somepseudo-devotees of Lord Krsna who prefer to imitate the Lord in Hisrasa-lila, or dance of love, forgetting their inability to liftGovardhana Hill. It is best, therefore, that one not try to imitate thepowerful, but simply follow their instructions; nor should one try tooccupy their posts without qualification. There are so many"incarnations" of God without the power of the Supreme Godhead.
TEXT 25
saktah karmany avidvamso
yatha kurvanti bharatakuryad vidvams tathasaktascikirsur loka-sangraham
SYNONYMSsaktah--being attached; karmani--prescribed duties; avidvamsah--the
ignorant; yatha--as much as; kurvanti--do it; bharata--O descendant ofBharata; kuryat--must do; vidvan--the learned; tatha--thus; asaktah--without attachment; cikirsuh--desiring to; loka-sangraham--leading thepeople in general.
TRANSLATIONAs the ignorant perform their duties with attachment to results,
similarly the learned may also act, but without attachment, for thesake of leading the people on the right path.
PURPORTA person in Krsna consciousness and a person not in Krsna consciousness
are differentiated by different desires. A Krsna conscious person doesnot do anything which is not conducive to development of Krsnaconsciousness. He may even act exactly like the ignorant person, who istoo much attached to material activities, but one is engaged in suchactivities for the satisfaction of his sense gratification, whereas theother is engaged for the satisfaction of Krsna. Therefore, the Krsna
conscious person is required to show the people how to act and how to
engage the results of action for the purpose of Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 26
na buddhi-bhedam janayed
ajnanam karma-sanginamjosayet sarva-karmanividvan yuktah samacaran
SYNONYMSna--do not; buddhi-bhedam--disrupt the intelligence; janayet--do;
ajnanam--of the foolish; karma-sanginam--attached to fruitive work;josayet--dovetailed; sarva--all; karmani--work; vidvan--learned;yuktah--all engaged; samacaran--practicing.
TRANSLATIONLet not the wise disrupt the minds of the ignorant who are attached to
fruitive action, they should not be encouraged to refrain from work,but to engage in work in the spirit of devotion.
PURPORTVedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah: That is the end of all Vedic
rituals. All rituals, all performances of sacrifices, and everythingthat is put into the Vedas, including all direction for materialactivities, are meant for understanding Krsna, who is the ultimate goalof life. But because the conditioned souls do not know anything beyondsense gratification, they study the Vedas to that end. Through senseregulations, however, one is gradually elevated to Krsna consciousness.Therefore a realized soul in Krsna consciousness should not disturbothers in their activities or understanding, but he should act byshowing how the results of all work can be dedicated to the service ofKrsna. The learned Krsna conscious person may act in such a way thatthe ignorant person working for sense gratification may learn how toact and how to behave. Although the ignorant man is not to be disturbedin his activities, still, a slightly developed Krsna conscious personmay directly be engaged in the service of the Lord without waiting forother Vedic formulas. For this fortunate man there is no need to followthe Vedic rituals, because in direct Krsna consciousness one can haveall the results simply by following the prescribed duties of aparticular person.
TEXT 27
prakrteh kriyamanani
gunaih karmani sarvasahahankara-vimudhatmakartaham iti manyate
SYNONYMSprakrteh--of material nature; kriyamanani--all being done; gunaih--by
the modes; karmani--activities; sarvasah--all kinds of; ahankara-vimudha--bewildered by false ego; atma--the spirit soul; karta--doer;aham--I; iti--thus; manyate--thinks.
TRANSLATION
The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of
material nature, thinks himself to be the doer of activities, which arein actuality carried out by nature.
PURPORTTwo persons, one in Krsna consciousness and the other in material
consciousness, working on the same level, may appear to be working onthe same platform, but there is a wide gulf of difference in theirrespective positions. The person in material consciousness is convincedby false ego that he is the doer of everything. He does not know thatthe mechanism of the body is produced by material nature, which worksunder the supervision of the Supreme Lord. The materialistic person hasno knowledge that ultimately he is under the control of Krsna. Theperson in false ego takes all credit for doing everythingindependently, and that is the symptom of his nescience. He does notknow that this gross and subtle body is the creation of materialnature, under the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and assuch his bodily and mental activities should be engaged in the serviceof Krsna, in Krsna consciousness. The ignorant man forgets that theSupreme Personality of Godhead is known as Hrsikesa, or the master ofthe senses of the material body, for due to his long misuse of thesenses in sense gratification, he is factually bewildered by the falseego, which makes him forget his eternal relationship with Krsna.
TEXT 28
tattva-vit tu maha-baho
guna-karma-vibhagayohguna gunesu vartantaiti matva na sajjate
SYNONYMStattva-vit--the knower of the Absolute Truth; tu--but; maha-baho--O
mighty-armed one; guna-karma--works under material influence;vibhagayoh--differences; gunah--senses; gunesu--in sense gratification;vartante--being engaged; iti--thus; matva--thinking; na--never;sajjate--becomes attached.
TRANSLATIONOne who is in knowledge of the Absolute Truth, O mighty-armed, does not
engage himself in the senses and sense gratification, knowing well thedifferences between work in devotion and work for fruitive results.
PURPORTThe knower of the Absolute Truth is convinced of his awkward position
in material association. He knows that he is part and parcel of theSupreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, and that his position should notbe in the material creation. He knows his real identity as part andparcel of the Supreme, who is eternal bliss and knowledge, and herealizes that somehow or other he is entrapped in the materialconception of life. In his pure state of existence he is meant to
dovetail his activities in devotional service to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krsna. He therefore engages himself in theactivities of Krsna consciousness and becomes naturally unattached tothe activities of the material senses, which are all circumstantial andtemporary. He knows that his material condition of life is under thesupreme control of the Lord; consequently he is not disturbed by allkinds of material reactions, which he considers to be the mercy of theLord. According to Srimad-Bhagavatam, one who knows the Absolute Truthin three different features--namely Brahman, Paramatma, and the SupremePersonality of Godhead--is called tattva-vit, for he knows also his ownfactual position in relationship with the Supreme.
TEXT 29
prakrter guna-sammudhah
sajjante guna-karmasutan akrtsna-vido mandankrtsna-vin na vicalayet
SYNONYMSprakrteh--impelled by the material modes; guna-sammudhah--befooled by
material identification; sajjante--become engaged; guna-karmasu--inmaterial activities; tan--all those; akrtsna-vidah--persons with a poorfund of knowledge; mandan--lazy to understand self-realization; krtsna-vit--one who is in factual knowledge; na--may not; vicalayet--try toagitate.
TRANSLATIONBewildered by the modes of material nature, the ignorant fully engage
themselves in material activities and become attached. But the wiseshould not unsettle them, although these duties are inferior due to theperformers' lack of knowledge.
PURPORTPersons who are unknowledgeable falsely identify with gross material
consciousness and are full of material designations. This body is agift of the material nature, and one who is too much attached to thebodily consciousness is called mandan, or a lazy person withoutunderstanding of spirit soul. Ignorant men think of the body as theself; bodily connections with others are accepted as kinsmanship, theland in which the body is obtained is the object of worship; and theformalities of religious rituals are considered ends in themselves.Social work, nationalism, and altruism are some of the activities forsuch materially designated persons. Under the spell of suchdesignations, they are always busy in the material field; for themspiritual realization is a myth and so they are not interested. Suchbewildered persons may even be engaged in such primary moral principlesof life as nonviolence and similar materially benevolent work. Thosewho are, however, enlightened in spiritual life, should not try toagitate such materially engrossed persons. Better to prosecute one'sown spiritual activities silently.Men who are ignorant cannot appreciate activities in Krsnaconsciousness, and therefore Lord Krsna advises us not to disturb themand simply waste valuable time. But the devotees of the Lord are morekind than the Lord because they understand the purpose of the Lord.
Consequently they undertake all kinds of risks, even to the point of
approaching ignorant men to try to engage them in the acts of Krsnaconsciousness, which are absolutely necessary for the human being.
TEXT 30
mayi sarvani karmani
sannyasyadhyatma-cetasanirasir nirmamo bhutvayudhyasva vigata-jvarah
SYNONYMSmayi--unto Me; sarvani--all sorts of; karmani--activities; sannyasya--
giving up completely; adhyatma--with full knowledge of the self;cetasa--consciousness; nirasih--without desire for profit; nirmamah--without ownership; bhutva--so being; yudhyasva--fight; vigata-jvarah--without being lethargic.
TRANSLATIONTherefore, O Arjuna, surrendering all your works unto Me, with mind
intent on Me, and without desire for gain and free from egoism andlethargy, fight.
PURPORTThis verse clearly indicates the purpose of the Bhagavad-gita. The Lord
instructs that one has to become fully Krsna conscious to dischargeduties, as if in military discipline. Such an injunction may makethings a little difficult; nevertheless duties must be carried out,with dependence on Krsna, because that is the constitutional positionof the living entity. The living entity cannot be happy independent ofthe cooperation of the Supreme Lord because the eternal constitutionalposition of the living entity is to become subordinate to the desiresof the Lord. Arjuna was, therefore, ordered by Sri Krsna to fight as ifthe Lord were his military commander. One has to sacrifice everythingfor the good will of the Supreme Lord, and at the same time dischargeprescribed duties without claiming proprietorship. Arjuna did not haveto consider the order of the Lord; he had only to execute His order.The Supreme Lord is the soul of all souls; therefore, one who dependssolely and wholly on the Supreme Soul without personal consideration,or in other words, one who is fully Krsna conscious, is calledadhyatma-cetasa. Nirasih means that one has to act on the order of themaster. Nor should one ever expect fruitive results. The cashier maycount millions of dollars for his employer, but he does not claim acent for himself. Similarly, one has to realize that nothing in theworld belongs to any individual person, but that everything belongs tothe Supreme Lord. That is the real purport of mayi, or "unto Me." Andwhen one acts in such Krsna consciousness, certainly he does not claimproprietorship over anything. This consciousness is called nirmama, or"nothing is mine." And, if there is any reluctance to execute such astern order which is without consideration of so-called kinsmen in thebodily relationship, that reluctance should be thrown off; in this wayone may become vigata-jvara or without feverish mentality or lethargy.Everyone, according to his quality and position, has a particular typeof work to discharge, and all such duties may be discharged in Krsna
consciousness, as described above. That will lead one to the path of
liberation.
TEXT 31
ye me matam idam nityam
anutisthanti manavahsraddhavanto 'nasuyantomucyante te 'pi karmabhih
SYNONYMSye--those; me--My; matam--injunctions; idam--this; nityam--eternal
function; anutisthanti--execute regularly; manavah--humankind; sraddha-vantah--with faith and devotion; anasuyantah--without envy; mucyante--become free; te--all of them; api--even; karmabhih--from the bondage ofthe law of fruitive action.
TRANSLATIONOne who execute his duties according to My injunctions and who follows
this teaching faithfully, without envy, becomes free from the bondageof fruitive actions.
PURPORTThe injunction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is the
essence of all Vedic wisdom, and therefore is eternally true withoutexception. As the Vedas are eternal, so this truth of Krsnaconsciousness is also eternal. One should have firm faith in thisinjunction, without envying the Lord. There are many philosophers whowrite comments on the Bhagavad-gita but have no faith in Krsna. Theywill never be liberated from the bondage of fruitive action. But anordinary man with firm faith in the eternal injunctions of the Lord,even though unable to execute such orders, becomes liberated from thebondage of the law of karma. In the beginning of Krsna consciousness,one may not fully discharge the injunctions of the Lord, but becauseone is not resentful of this principle and works sincerely withoutconsideration of defeat and hopelessness, he will surely be promoted tothe stage of pure Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 32
ye tv etad abhyasuyanto
nanutisthanti me matamsarva-jnana-vimudhams tanviddhi nastan acetasah
SYNONYMSye--those; tu--however; etat--this; abhyasuyantah--out of envy; na--do
not; anutisthanti--regularly perform; me--My; matam--injunction; sarva-jnana--all sorts of knowledge; vimudhan--perfectly befooled; tan--theyare; viddhi--know it well; nastan--all ruined; acetasah--without Krsnaconsciousness.
TRANSLATION
But those who, out of envy disregard these teachings and do not
practice them regularly, are to be considered bereft of all knowledge,befooled, and doomed to ignorance and bondage.
PURPORTThe flaw of not being Krsna conscious is clearly stated herein. As
there is punishment for disobedience to the order of the supremeexecutive head, so there is certainly punishment for the disobedienceof the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. A disobedientperson, however great he may be, is ignorant of his own self, of theSupreme Brahman, and Paramatma and the Personality of Godhead, due to avacant heart. Therefore there is no hope of perfection of life for him.
TEXT 33
sadrsam cestate svasyah
prakrter jnanavan apiprakrtim yanti bhutaninigrahah kim karisyati
SYNONYMSsadrsam--accordingly; cestate--tries; svasyah--in one's own nature;
prakrteh--modes; jnana-van--learned; api--although; prakrtim--nature;yanti--undergo; bhutani--all living entities; nigrahah--suppression;kim--what; karisyati--can do.
TRANSLATIONEven a man of knowledge acts according to his own nature, for everyone
follows his nature. What can repression accomplish?
PURPORTUnless one is situated on the transcendental platform of Krsna
consciousness he cannot get free from the influence of the modes ofmaterial nature, as it is confirmed by the Lord in the Seventh Chapter(7.14). Therefore, even for the most highly educated person on themundane plane, it is impossible to get out of the entanglement of mayasimply by theoretical knowledge, or by separating the soul from thebody. There are many so-called spiritualists who outwardly pose to beadvanced in the science, but inwardly or privately are completely underthe particular modes of nature which they are unable to surpass.Academically, one may be very learned, but because of his longassociation with material nature, he is in bondage. Krsna consciousnesshelps one to get out of the material entanglement, even though one maybe engaged in his prescribed duties. Therefore, without being fully inKrsna consciousness, no one should suddenly give up his prescribedduties and become a so-called yogi or transcendentalist artificially.It is better to be situated in one's position and try to attain Krsnaconsciousness under superior training. Thus one may be freed from theclutches of maya.
TEXT 34
indriyasyendriyasyarthe
raga-dvesau vyavasthitau
tayor na vasam agacchet
tau hy asya paripanthinau
SYNONYMSindriyasya--of the senses; indriyasya arthe--in the sense objects;
raga--attachment; dvesau--also detachment; vyavasthitau--put underregulations; tayoh--of them; na--never; vasam--control; agacchet--oneshould come; tau--those; hi--certainly; asya--his; paripanthinau--stumbling blocks.
TRANSLATIONAttraction and repulsion for sense objects are felt by embodied beings,
but one should not fall under the control of senses and sense objectsbecause they are stumbling blocks on the path of self-realization.
PURPORTThose who are in Krsna consciousness are naturally reluctant to engage
in material sense gratification. But those who are not in suchconsciousness should follow the rules and regulations of the revealedscriptures. Unrestricted sense enjoyment is the cause of materialencagement, but one who follows the rules and regulations of therevealed scriptures does not become entangled by the sense objects. Forexample, sex enjoyment is a necessity for the conditioned soul, and sexenjoyment is allowed under the license of marriage ties. For example,according to scriptural injunctions, one is forbidden to engage in sexrelationships with any women other than one's wife. All other women areto be considered as one's mother. But, in spite of such injunctions, aman is still inclined to have sex relationships with other women. Thesepropensities are to be curbed; otherwise they will be stumbling blockson the path of self-realization. As long as the material body is there,the necessities of the material body are allowed, but under rules andregulations. And yet, we should not rely upon the control of suchallowances. One has to follow these rules and regulations, unattachedto them, because practice of sense gratification under regulations mayalso lead one to go astray--as much as there is always the chance of anaccident, even on the royal roads. Although they may be very carefullymaintained, no one can guarantee that there will be no danger even onthe safest road. The sense enjoyment spirit has been current a verylong, long time, owing to material association. Therefore, in spite ofregulated sense enjoyment, there is every chance of falling down;therefore any attachment for regulated sense enjoyment must also beavoided by all means. But action in the loving service of Krsnadetaches one from all kinds of sensory activities. Therefore, no oneshould try to be detached from Krsna consciousness at any stage oflife. The whole purpose of detachment from all kinds of senseattachment is ultimately to become situated on the platform of Krsnaconsciousness.
TEXT 35
sreyan sva-dharmo vigunah
para-dharmat sv-anusthitatsva-dharme nidhanam sreyahpara-dharmo bhayavahah
SYNONYMS
sreyan--far better; sva-dharmah--one's prescribed duties; vigunah--even
faulty; para-dharmat--from duties mentioned for others; su-anusthitat--than perfectly done; sva-dharme--in one's prescribed duties; nidhanam--destruction; sreyah--better; para-dharmah--duties prescribed forothers; bhaya-avahah--dangerous.
TRANSLATIONIt is far better to discharge one's prescribed duties, even though they
may be faultily, than another's duties. Destruction in the course ofperforming one's own duty is better than engaging in another's duties,for to follow another's path is dangerous.
PURPORTOne should therefore discharge his prescribed duties in full Krsna
consciousness rather than those prescribed for others. Prescribedduties complement one's psychophysical condition, under the spell ofthe modes of material nature. Spiritual duties are as ordered by thespiritual master, for the transcendental service of Krsna. But bothmaterially or spiritually, one should stick to his prescribed dutieseven up to death, rather than imitate another's prescribed duties.Duties on the spiritual platform and duties on the material platformmay be different, but the principle of following the authorizeddirection is always good for the performer. When one is under the spellof the modes of material nature, one should follow the prescribed rulesfor particular situations and should not imitate others. For example, abrahmana, who is in the mode of goodness, is nonviolent, whereas aksatriya, who is in the mode of passion, is allowed to be violent. Assuch, for a ksatriya it is better to be vanquished following the rulesof violence than to imitate a brahmana who follows the principles ofnonviolence. Everyone has to cleanse his heart by a gradual process,not abruptly. However, when one transcends the modes of material natureand is fully situated in Krsna consciousness, he can perform anythingand everything under the direction of the bona fide spiritual master.In that complete stage of Krsna consciousness, the ksatriya may act asa brahmana, or a brahmana may act as a ksatriya. In the transcendentalstage, the distinctions of the material world do not apply. Forexample, Visvamitra was originally a ksatriya, but later on he acted asa brahmana, whereas Parasurama was a brahmana, but later on he acted asa ksatriya. Being transcendentally situated, they could do so; but aslong as one is on the material platform, he must perform his dutiesaccording to the modes of material nature. At the same time, he musthave a full sense of Krsna consciousness.TEXT 36
arjuna uvaca
atha kena prayukto 'yampapam carati purusahanicchann api varsneyabalad iva niyojitah
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; atha--hereafter; kena--by what; prayuktah--
impelled; ayam--one; papam--sins; carati--acts; purusah--a man;
anicchan--without desiring; api--although; varsneya--O descendant of
Vrsni; balat--by force; iva--as if; niyojitah--engaged.
TRANSLATIONArjuna said: O descendant of Vrsni, by what is one impelled to sinful
acts, even unwillingly, as if engaged by force?
PURPORTA living entity, as part and parcel of the Supreme, is originally
spiritual, pure, and free from all material contaminations. Therefore,by nature he is not subjected to the sins of the material world. Butwhen he is in contact with the material nature, he acts in many sinfulways without hesitation, and sometimes even against his will. As such,Arjuna's question to Krsna is very sanguine, as to the perverted natureof the living entities. Although the living entity sometimes does notwant to act in sin, he is still forced to act. Sinful actions are not,however, impelled by the Supersoul within, but are due to anothercause, as the Lord explains in the next verse.
TEXT 37
sri-bhagavan uvaca
kama esa krodha esarajo-guna-samudbhavahmahasano maha-papmaviddhy enam iha vairinam
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Personality of Godhead said; kamah--lust; esah-
-all these; krodhah--wrath; esah--all these; rajah-guna--the mode ofpassion; samudbhavah--born of; maha-asanah--all-devouring; maha-papma--greatly sinful; viddhi--know; enam--this; iha--in the material world;vairinam--greatest enemy.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: It is lust only, Arjuna, which is born of
contact with the material mode of passion and later transformed intowrath, and which is the all-devouring, sinful enemy of this world.
PURPORTWhen a living entity comes in contact with the material creation, his
eternal love for Krsna is transformed into lust, in association withthe mode of passion. Or, in other words, the sense of love of Godbecomes transformed into lust, as milk in contact with sour tamarind istransformed into yogurt. Then again, when lust is unsatisfied, it turnsinto wrath; wrath is transformed into illusion, and illusion continuesthe material existence. Therefore, lust is the greatest enemy of theliving entity, and it is lust only which induces the pure living entityto remain entangled in the material world. Wrath is the manifestationof the mode of ignorance; these modes exhibit themselves as wrath andother corollaries. If, therefore, the mode of passion, instead of beingdegraded into the mode of ignorance, is elevated to the mode of
goodness by the prescribed method of living and acting, then one can be
saved from the degradation of wrath by spiritual attachment.The Supreme Personality of Godhead expanded Himself into many for Hisever-increasing spiritual bliss, and the living entities are parts andparcels of this spiritual bliss. They also have partial independence,but by misuse of their independence, when the service attitude istransformed into the propensity for sense enjoyment, they come underthe sway of lust. This material creation is created by the Lord to givea facility to the conditioned souls to fulfill these lustfulpropensities, and when they are completely baffled by prolonged lustfulactivities, the living entities begin to inquire about their realposition.This inquiry is the beginning of the Vedanta-sutras, wherein it issaid, athato brahma-jijnasa: one should inquire into the Supreme. Andthe Supreme is defined in the Srimad-Bhagavatam as janmady asya yato'nvayad itaratas ca, or, "The origin of everything is the SupremeBrahman." Therefore, the origin of lust is also in the Supreme. If,therefore, lust is transformed into love for the Supreme, ortransformed into Krsna consciousness--or, in other words, desiringeverything for Krsna--then both lust and wrath can be spiritualized.Hanuman, the greatest servitor of Lord Rama, engaged his wrath upon hisenemies for the satisfaction of the Lord. Therefore, lust and wrath,when they are employed in Krsna consciousness, become our friendsinstead of our enemies.
TEXT 38
dhumenavriyate vahnir
yathadarso malena cayatholbenavrto garbhastatha tenedam avrtam
SYNONYMSdhumena--by smoke; avriyate--covered; vahnih--fire; yatha--just as;
adarsah--mirror; malena--by dust; ca--also; yatha--just as; ulbena--bythe womb; avrtah--is covered; garbhah--embryo; tatha--so; tena--by thatlust; idam--this; avrtam--is covered.
TRANSLATIONAs fire is covered by smoke, as a mirror is covered by dust, or as the
embryo is covered by the womb, similarly, the living entity is coveredby different degrees of this lust.
PURPORTThere are three degrees of covering of the living entity by which his
pure consciousness is obscured. This covering is but lust underdifferent manifestations like smoke in the fire, dust on the mirror,and the womb about the embryo. When lust is compared to smoke, it isunderstood that the fire of the living spark can be a little perceived.In other words when the living entity exhibits his Krsna consciousnessslightly, he may be likened to the fire covered by smoke. Although fireis necessary where there is smoke, there is no overt manifestation offire in the early stage. This stage is like the beginning of Krsnaconsciousness. The dust on the mirror refers to a cleansing process ofthe mirror of the mind by so many spiritual methods. The best process
is to chant the holy names of the Lord. The embryo covered by the womb
is an analogy illustrating a helpless position, for the child in thewomb is so helpless that he cannot even move. This stage of livingcondition can be compared to that of the trees. The trees are alsoliving entities, but they have been put in such a condition of life bysuch a great exhibition of lust that they are almost void of allconsciousness. The covered mirror is compared to the birds and beasts,and the smoke covered fire is compared to the human being. In the formof a human being, the living entity may revive a little Krsnaconsciousness, and, if he makes further development, the fire ofspiritual life can be kindled in the human form of life. By carefulhandling of the smoke in the fire, the fire can be made to blaze.Therefore the human form of life is a chance for the living entity toescape the entanglement of material existence. In the human form oflife, one can conquer the enemy, lust, by cultivation of Krsnaconsciousness under able guidance.
TEXT 39
avrtam jnanam etena
jnanino nitya-vairinakama-rupena kaunteyaduspurenanalena ca
SYNONYMSavrtam--covered; jnanam--pure consciousness; etena--by this; jnaninah--
of the knower; nitya-vairina--eternal enemy; kama-rupena--in the formof lust; kaunteya--O son of Kunti; duspurena--never to be satisfied;analena--by the fire; ca--also.
TRANSLATIONThus, a man's pure consciousness is covered by his eternal enemy in the
form of lust, which is never satisfied and which burns like fire.
PURPORTIt is said in the Manu-smrti that lust cannot be satisfied by any
amount of sense enjoyment, just as fire is never extinguished by aconstant supply of fuel. In the material world, the center of allactivities is sex, and thus this material world is called maithunya-agara, or the shackles of sex life. In the ordinary prison house,criminals are kept within bars; similarly, the criminals who aredisobedient to the laws of the Lord are shackled by sex life.Advancement of material civilization on the basis of sensegratification means increasing the duration of the material existenceof a living entity. Therefore, this lust is the symbol of ignorance bywhich the living entity is kept within the material world. While oneenjoys sense gratification, it may be that there is some feeling ofhappiness, but actually that so-called feeling of happiness is theultimate enemy of the sense enjoyer.
TEXT 40
indriyani mano buddhir
asyadhisthanam ucyateetair vimohayaty esa
jnanam avrtya dehinam
SYNONYMSindriyani--the senses; manah--the mind; buddhih--the intelligence;
asya--of the lust; adhisthanam--sitting place; ucyate--called; etaih--by all these; vimohayati--bewilders; esah--of this; jnanam--knowledge;avrtya--covering; dehinam--the embodied.
TRANSLATIONThe senses, the mind and the intelligence are the sitting places of
this lust, which veils the real knowledge of the living entity andbewilders him.
PURPORTThe enemy has captured different strategic positions in the body of the
conditioned soul, and therefore Lord Krsna is giving hints of thoseplaces, so that one who wants to conquer the enemy may know where hecan be found. Mind is the center of all the activities of the senses,and thus the mind is the reservoir of all ideas of sense gratification;and, as a result, the mind and the senses become the repositories oflust. Next, the intelligence department becomes the capital of suchlustful propensities. Intelligence is the immediate next-door neighborof the spirit soul. Lusty intelligence influences the spirit soul toacquire the false ego and identify itself with matter, and thus withthe mind and the senses. The spirit soul becomes addicted to enjoyingthe material senses and mistakes this as true happiness. This falseidentification of the spirit soul is very nicely explained in theSrimad-Bhagavatam (10.84.13):
yasyatma-buddhih kunape tri-dhatuke
sva-dhih kalatradisu bhauma ijya-dhihyat-tirtha-buddhih salile na karhicijjanesv abhijnesu sa eva go-kharah
"A human being who identifies this body made of three elements with his
self, who considers the by-products of the body to be his kinsmen, whoconsiders the land of birth as worshipable, and who goes to the placeof pilgrimage simply to take a bath rather than meet men oftranscendental knowledge there, is to be considered as an ass or a cow.
TEXT 41
tasmat tvam indriyany adau
niyamya bharatarsabhapapmanam prajahi hy enamjnana-vijnana-nasanam
SYNONYMStasmat--therefore; tvam--you; indriyani--senses; adau--in the
beginning; niyamya--by regulating; bharata-rsabha--O chief amongst thedescendants of Bharata; papmanam--the great symbol of sin; prajahi--curb; hi--certainly; enam--this; jnana--knowledge; vijnana--scientificknowledge of the pure soul; nasanam--the destroyer.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O Arjuna, best of the Bharatas, in the very beginning curb
this great symbol of sin [lust] by regulating the senses, and slay thisdestroyer of knowledge and self-realization.
PURPORTThe Lord advised Arjuna to regulate the senses from the very beginning
so that he could curb the greatest sinful enemy, lust, which destroysthe urge for self-realization and specifically knowledge of the self.Jnana refers to knowledge of self as distinguished from non-self, or,in other words, knowledge that the spirit soul is not the body. Vijnanarefers to specific knowledge of the spirit soul and knowledge of one'sconstitutional position and his relationship to the Supreme Soul. It isexplained thus in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (2.9.31):
jnanam parama-guhyam me
yad vijnana-samanvitamsa-rahasyam tad-angam cagrhana gaditam maya
"The knowledge of the self and the Supreme Self is very confidential
and mysterious, being veiled by maya, but such knowledge and specificrealization can be understood if it is explained by the Lord Himself."Bhagavad-gita gives us that knowledge, specifically knowledge of theself. The living entities are parts and parcels of the Lord, andtherefore they are simply meant to serve the Lord. This consciousnessis called Krsna consciousness. So, from the very beginning of life onehas to learn this Krsna consciousness, and thereby one may become fullyKrsna conscious and act accordingly.Lust is only the perverted reflection of love of God which is naturalfor every living entity. But if one is educated in Krsna consciousnessfrom the very beginning, that natural love of God cannot deteriorateinto lust. When love of God deteriorates into lust, it is verydifficult to return to the normal condition. Nonetheless, Krsnaconsciousness is so powerful that even a late beginner can become alover of God by following the regulative principles of devotionalservice. So, from any stage of life, or from the time of understandingits urgency, one can begin regulating the senses in Krsnaconsciousness, devotional service of the Lord, and turn the lust intolove of Godhead--the highest perfectional stage of human life.
TEXT 42
indriyani parany ahur
indriyebhyah param manahmanasas tu para buddhiryo buddheh paratas tu sah
SYNONYMSindriyani--senses; parani--superior; ahuh--is said; indriyebhyah--more
than the senses; param--superior; manah--the mind; manasah--more thanthe mind; tu--also; para--superior; buddhih--intelligence; yah--onewho; buddheh--more than the intelligence; paratah--superior; tu--but;sah--he.
TRANSLATION
The working senses are superior to dull matter; mind is higher than the
senses; intelligence is still higher than the mind; and he [the soul]is even higher than the intelligence.
PURPORTThe senses are different outlets for the activities of lust. Lust is
reserved within the body, but it is given vent through the senses.Therefore, the senses are superior to the body as a whole. Theseoutlets are not in use when there is superior consciousness, or Krsnaconsciousness. In Krsna consciousness the soul makes direct connectionwith the Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore the bodilyfunctions, as described here, ultimately end in the Supreme Soul.Bodily action means the functions of the senses, and stopping thesenses means stopping all bodily actions. But since the mind is active,then, even though the body may be silent and at rest, the mind willact--as it does during dreaming. But, above the mind there is thedetermination of the intelligence, and above the intelligence is thesoul proper. If, therefore, the soul is directly engaged with theSupreme, naturally all other subordinates, namely, the intelligence,mind and the senses, will be automatically engaged. In the KathaUpanisad there is a passage, in which it is said that the objects ofsense gratification are superior to the senses, and mind is superior tothe sense objects. If, therefore, the mind is directly engaged in theservice of the Lord constantly, then there is no chance of the sensesbecoming engaged in other ways. This mental attitude has already beenexplained. If the mind is engaged in the transcendental service of theLord, there is no chance of its being engaged in the lowerpropensities. In the Katha Upanisad the soul has been described asmahan, the great. Therefore the soul is above all--namely, the senseobjects, the senses, the mind and the intelligence. Therefore, directlyunderstanding the constitutional position of the soul is the solutionof the whole problem.With intelligence one has to seek out the constitutional position ofthe soul and then engage the mind always in Krsna consciousness. Thatsolves the whole problem. A neophyte spiritualist is generally advisedto keep aloof from the objects of the senses. One has to strengthen themind by use of intelligence. If by intelligence one engages one's mindin Krsna consciousness, by complete surrender unto the SupremePersonality of Godhead, then, automatically, the mind becomes stronger,and even though the senses are very strong, like serpents, they will beno more effective than serpents with broken fangs. But even though thesoul is the master of intelligence and mind, and the senses also,still, unless it is strengthened by association with Krsna in Krsnaconsciousness, there is every chance of falling down due to theagitated mind.
TEXT 43
evam buddheh param buddhva
samstabhyatmanam atmanajahi satrum maha-bahokama-rupam durasadam
SYNONYMS
evam--thus; buddheh--of intelligence; param--superior; buddhva--so
knowing; samstabhya--by steadying; atmanam--of the mind; atmana--bydeliberate intelligence; jahi--conquer; satrum--the enemy; maha-baho--Omighty-armed one; kama-rupam--the form of lust; durasadam--formidable.
TRANSLATIONThus knowing oneself to be transcendental to material senses, mind and
intelligence, one should control the lower self by the higher self andthus--by spiritual strength--conquer this insatiable enemy known aslust.
PURPORTThis Third Chapter of the Bhagavad-gita is conclusively directive to
Krsna consciousness by knowing oneself as the eternal servitor of theSupreme Personality of Godhead, without considering impersonal voidnessas the ultimate end. In the material existence of life, one iscertainly influenced by propensities for lust and desire for dominatingthe resources of material nature. Desire for overlording and sensegratification are the greatest enemies of the conditioned soul; but bythe strength of Krsna consciousness, one can control the materialsenses, the mind and the intelligence. One may not give up work andprescribed duties all of a sudden; but by gradually developing Krsnaconsciousness, one can be situated in a transcendental position withoutbeing influenced by the material senses and the mind--by steadyintelligence directed toward one's pure identity. This is the sum totalof this chapter. In the immature stage of material existence,philosophical speculations and artificial attempts to control thesenses by the so-called practice of yogic postures can never help a mantoward spiritual life. He must be trained in Krsna consciousness byhigher intelligence.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Third Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Karma-yoga, or the Discharge of One'sPrescribed Duty in Krsna Consciousness.
Bhagavad-gita As It Is  by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of
this book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended forpersonal non-commercial use only, under the fair use guidelinesestablished by international copyright laws. You may use thiselectronic file to evaluate the printed version of this book, for yourown private use, or for short excerpts used in academic works,research, student papers, presentations, and the like. You candistribute this evaluation copy to others over the Internet, so long asyou keep this copyright information intact. You may not reproduce morethan ten percent (10%) of this book in any media without the expresswritten permission from the copyright holders. Reference any excerptsin the following way: Excerpted from Bhagavad-gita As It Is by A.C.Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta BookTrust International, www.Krishna.com .
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1972-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.
