soul: imperfect senses, the propensity for cheating, certainty of
committing mistakes, and certainty of being illusioned. These fourprincipal defects in conditioned life disqualify one from putting forthrules and regulations. Therefore, the rules and regulations asdescribed in the sastra--being above these defects--are acceptedwithout alteration by all great saints, acaryas and great souls.In India there are many parties of spiritual understanding, generallyclassified as two: the impersonalist and the personalist. Both of them,however, lead their lives according to the principles of the Vedas.Without following the principles of the scriptures, one cannot elevatehimself to the perfectional stage. One who actually, therefore,understands the purport of the sastras is considered fortunate.In human society, aversion to the principles of understanding theSupreme Personality of Godhead is the cause of all falldowns. That isthe greatest offense of human life. Therefore, maya, the materialenergy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is always giving ustrouble in the shape of the threefold miseries. This material energy isconstituted of the three modes of material nature. One has to raisehimself at least to the mode of goodness before the path tounderstanding the Supreme Lord can be opened. Without raising oneselfto the standard of the mode of goodness, one remains in ignorance andpassion, which are the cause of demoniac life. Those in the modes ofpassion and ignorance deride the scriptures, deride the holy man, andderide the proper understanding of the spiritual master, and they donot care for the regulations of the scriptures. In spite of hearing theglories of devotional service, they are not attracted. Thus theymanufacture their own way of elevation. These are some of the defectsof human society, which lead to the demoniac status of life. If,however, one is able to be guided by a proper and bona fide spiritualmaster, who can lead one to the path of elevation, to the higher stage,then one's life becomes successful.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Sixteenth Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of the Divine and Demoniac Natures.
Chapter 17
The Divisions of Faith
TEXT 1
arjuna uvaca
ye sastra-vidhim utsrjyayajante sraddhayanvitahtesam nistha tu ka krsnasattvam aho rajas tamah
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; ye--those; sastra-vidhim--the regulations
of scripture; utsrjya--giving up; yajante--worship; sraddhaya--fullfaith; anvitah--possessed of; tesam--of them; nistha--faith; tu--but;ka--what is that; krsna--O Krsna; sattvam--in goodness; aho--said;rajah--in passion; tamah--in ignorance.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said, O Krsna, what is the situation of one who do not follow
the principles of scripture but who worships according to his ownimagination? Is he in goodness, in passion or in ignorance?
PURPORTIn the Fourth Chapter, thirty-ninth verse, it is said that a person
faithful to a particular type of worship gradually becomes elevated tothe stage of knowledge and attains the highest perfectional stage ofpeace and prosperity. In the Sixteenth Chapter, it is concluded thatone who does not follow the principles laid down in the scriptures iscalled an asura, demon, and one who follows the scriptural injunctionsfaithfully is called a deva, or demigod. Now, if one, with faith,follows some rules which are not mentioned in the scripturalinjunctions, what is his position? This doubt of Arjuna's is to becleared by Krsna. Are those who create some sort of God by selecting ahuman being and placing their faith in him worshiping in goodness,passion or ignorance? Do such persons attain the perfectional stage oflife? Is it possible for them to be situated in real knowledge andelevate themselves to the highest perfectional stage? Do those who donot follow the rules and regulations of the scriptures but who havefaith in something and worship gods and demigods and men attain successin their effort? Arjuna is putting these questions to Krsna.
TEXT 2
sri-bhagavan uvaca
tri-vidha bhavati sraddhadehinam sa svabhava-jasattviki rajasi caivatamasi ceti tam srnu
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; tri-vidha-
-three kinds; bhavati--become; sraddha--faith; dehinam--of theembodied; sa--that; sva-bhava-ja--according to his mode of materialnature; sattviki--mode of goodness; rajasi--mode of passion; ca--also;eva--certainly; tamasi--mode of ignorance; ca--and; iti--thus; tam--that; srnu--hear from Me.
TRANSLATIONThe Supreme Lord said, according to the modes of nature acquired by the
embodied soul, one's faith can be of three kinds--goodness, passion orignorance. Now hear about these.
PURPORTThose who know the rules and regulations of the scriptures, but, out of
laziness or indolence, give up following these rules and regulationsare governed by the modes of material nature. According to theirprevious activities in the modes of goodness, passion or ignorance,they acquire a nature which is of a specific quality. The associationof the living entity with the different modes of nature has been goingon perpetually since the living entity is in contact with materialnature. Thus he acquires different types of mentality according to hisassociation with the material modes. But this nature can be changed if
one associates with a bona fide spiritual master and abides by his
rules and the scriptures. Gradually, one can change his position fromignorance to goodness, or from passion to goodness. The conclusion isthat blind faith in a particular mode of nature cannot help a personbecome elevated to the perfectional stage. One has to consider thingscarefully, with intelligence, in the association of a bona fidespiritual master. Thus one can change his position to a higher mode ofnature.
TEXT 3
sattvanurupa sarvasya
sraddha bhavati bharatasraddha-mayo 'yam purusoyo yac-chraddhah sa eva sah
SYNONYMSsattva-anurupa--according to the existence; sarvasya--of everyone;
sraddha--faith; bhavati--becomes; bharata--O son of Bharata; sraddha--faith; mayah--full; ayam--this; purusah--living entity; yah--anyone;yat--that; sraddhah--faith; sah--that; eva--certainly; sah--he.
TRANSLATIONAccording to one's existence under the various modes of nature, one
evolves a particular kind of faith. The living being is said to be of aparticular faith according to the modes he has acquired.
PURPORTEveryone has a particular type of faith, regardless of what he is. But
his faith is considered good, passionate or ignorant according to thenature he has acquired. Thus, according to his particular type offaith, one associates with certain persons. Now the real fact is thatevery living being, as is stated in the Fifteenth Chapter, isoriginally the fragmental part and parcel of the Supreme Lord.Therefore one is originally transcendental to all the modes of materialnature. But when one forgets his relationship with the SupremePersonality of Godhead and comes into contact with the material naturein conditional life, he generates his own position by association withthe different varieties of material nature. The resultant artificialfaith and existence are only material. Although one may be conducted bysome impression, or some conception of life, still, originally, he isnirguna, or transcendental. Therefore one has to become cleansed of thematerial contamination that he has acquired in order to regain hisrelationship with the Supreme Lord. That is the only path back withoutfear: Krsna consciousness. If one is situated in Krsna consciousness,then that path is guaranteed for his elevation to the perfectionalstage. If one does not take to this path of self-realization, then heis surely to be conducted by the influence of the modes of nature.The word sraddha, or faith, is very significant in this verse. Sraddhaor faith always comes out of the works of goodness. One's faith may bein a demigod or some created God or some mental concoction. It issupposed to be one's strong faith in something that is productive ofthe works of material goodness. But in material conditional life, noworks of material nature are completely purified. They are mixed. Theyare not in pure goodness. Pure goodness is transcendental; in pure
goodness one can understand the real nature of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. As long as one's faith is not completely in purifiedgoodness, the faith is subject to contamination by any of the modes ofmaterial nature. The contaminated modes of material nature expand tothe heart. Therefore according to the position of the heart in contactwith a particular mode of material nature, one's faith is established.It should be understood, that if one's heart is in the mode ofgoodness, his faith is also in the mode of goodness. If his heart is inthe mode of passion, his faith is also in the mode of passion. And ifhis heart is in the mode of darkness, illusion, his faith is also thuscontaminated. Thus we find different types of faith in this world, andthere are different types of religions due to different types of faith.The real principle of religious faith is situated in the mode of puregoodness, but because the heart is tainted, we find different types ofreligious principles. Thus according to different types of faith, thereare different kinds of worship.
TEXT 4
yajante sattvika devan
yaksa-raksamsi rajasahpretan bhuta-ganams canyeyajante tamasa janah
SYNONYMSyajante--worship; sattvikah--those who are in the mode of goodness;
devan--demigods; yaksa-raksamsi rajasah--those who are in the mode ofpassion worship demons; pretan--dead spirits; bhuta-ganan--ghosts; caanye--and others; yajante--worship; tamasah--in the mode of ignorance;janah--people.
TRANSLATIONMen in the mode of goodness worship the demigods; those in the mode of
passion worship the demons and those in the mode of ignorance worshipghosts and spirits.
PURPORTIn this verse the Supreme Personality of Godhead describes different
kinds of worshipers according to their external activities. Accordingto scriptural injunction only the Supreme Personality of Godhead isworshipable, but those who are not very conversant with, or faithfulto, the scriptural injunctions worship different objects, according totheir specific situations in the modes of material nature. Those whoare situated in goodness generally worship the demigods. The demigodsinclude Brahma, Siva and others such as Indra, Candra and the sun-god.There are various demigods. Those in goodness worship a particulardemigod for a particular purpose. Similarly, those who are in the modeof passion worship the demons. We recall that during the Second WorldWar, a man in Calcutta worshiped Hitler because thanks to that war hehad amassed a large amount of wealth by dealing in the black market.Similarly, those in the modes of passion and ignorance generally selecta powerful man to be God. They think that anyone can be worshiped asGod and that the same results will be obtained.Now, it is clearly described here that those who are in the mode ofpassion worship and create such gods, and those who are in the mode of
ignorance, in darkness, worship dead spirits. Sometimes people worship
at the tomb of some dead man. Sexual service is also considered to bein the mode of darkness. Similarly, in remote villages in India thereare worshipers of ghosts. We have seen that in India the lower-classpeople sometimes go to the forest, and if they have knowledge that aghost lives in a tree, they worship that tree and offer sacrifices.These different kinds of worship are not actually God worship. Godworship is for persons who are transcendentally situated in puregoodness. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (4.3.23) it is said, sattvamvisuddham vasudeva-sabditam: "When a man is situated in pure goodness,he worships Vasudeva." The purport is that those who are completelypurified of the material modes of nature and who are transcendentallysituated can worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead.The impersonalists are supposed to be situated in the mode of goodness,and they worship five kinds of demigods. They worship the impersonalVisnu, or the Visnu form in the material world, which is known asphilosophized Visnu. Visnu is the expansion of the Supreme Personalityof Godhead, but the impersonalists, because they do not ultimatelybelieve in the Supreme Personality of Godhead, imagine that the Visnuform is just another aspect of the impersonal Brahman; similarly, theyimagine that Lord Brahma is the impersonal form in the material mode ofpassion. Thus they sometimes describe five kinds of gods that areworshipable, but because they think that the actual truth is impersonalBrahman, they dispose of all worshipable objects at the ultimate end.In conclusion, the different qualities of the material modes of naturecan be purified through association with persons who are oftranscendental nature.
TEXTS 5-6
asastra-vihitam ghoram
tapyante ye tapo janahdambhahankara-samyuktahkama-raga-balanvitah
karsayantah sarira-stham
bhuta-gramam acetasahmam caivantah sarira-sthamtan viddhy asura-niscayan
SYNONYMSasastra--not mentioned in the scriptures; vihitam--directed; ghoram--
harmful to others; tapyante--undergo penances; ye--those; tapah--austerities; janah--persons; dambha--pride; ahankara--egoism;samyuktah--engaged; kama--lust; raga--attachment; bala--force; anvitah--impelled by; karsayantah--tormenting; sarira-stham--situated withinthe body; bhuta-gramam--combination of material elements; acetasah--bysuch a misled mentality; mam--to Me; ca--also; eva--certainly; antah--within; sarira-stham--situated in the body; tan--them; viddhi--understand; asura--demons; niscayan--certainly.
TRANSLATIONThose who undergo severe austerities and penances not recommended in
the scriptures, performing them out of pride, egoism, lust andattachment, who are impelled by passion and who torture their bodily
organs as well as the Supersoul dwelling within are to be known as
demons.
PURPORTThere are persons who manufacture modes of austerity and penances which
are not mentioned in the scriptural injunctions. For instance, fastingfor some ulterior purpose, such as to promote a purely political end isnot mentioned in the scriptural directions. The scriptures recommendfasting for spiritual advancement, not for some political end or socialpurpose. Persons who take to such austerities are, according toBhagavad-gita, certainly demoniac. Their acts are against thescriptural injunctions and are not beneficial for the people ingeneral. Actually, they act out of pride, false ego, lust andattachment for material enjoyment. By such activities, not only is thecombination of material elements of which the body is constructeddisturbed, but also the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself livingwithin the body. Such unauthorized fasting or austerities for somepolitical end are certainly very disturbing to others. They are notmentioned in the Vedic literature. A demoniac person may think that hecan force his enemy or other parties to comply with his desire by thismethod, but sometimes one dies by such fasting. These acts are notapproved by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He says that thosewho engage in them are demons. Such demonstrations are insults to theSupreme Personality of Godhead because they are enacted in disobedienceto the Vedic scriptural injunctions. The word acetasah is significantin this connection. Persons of normal mental condition must obey thescriptural injunctions. Those who are not in such a position neglectand disobey the scriptures and manufacture their own way of austeritiesand penances. One should always remember the ultimate end of thedemoniac people, as described in the previous chapter. The Lord forcesthem to take birth in the wombs of demoniac persons. Consequently theywill live by demoniac principles life after life without knowing theirrelationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If, however, suchpersons are fortunate enough to be guided by a spiritual master who candirect them to the path of Vedic wisdom, they can get out of thisentanglement and ultimately achieve the supreme goal.
TEXT 7
aharas tv api sarvasya
tri-vidho bhavati priyahyajnas tapas tatha danamtesam bhedam imam srnu
SYNONYMSaharah--eating; tu--certainly; api--also; sarvasya--of everyone; tri-
vidhah--three kinds; bhavati--there are; priyah--dear; yajnah--sacrifice; tapah--austerity; tatha--also; danam--charity; tesam--ofthem; bhedam--differences; imam--thus; srnu--hear.
TRANSLATIONEven food of which all partake is of three kinds, according to the
three modes of material nature. The same is true of sacrifices,austerities and charity. Listen, and I shall tell you of thedistinctions of these.
PURPORT
In terms of different situations in the modes of material nature, there
are differences in the manner of eating, performing sacrifices,austerities and charities. They are not all conducted on the samelevel. Those who can understand analytically what kind of performancesare in what modes of material nature are actually wise; those whoconsider all kinds of sacrifice or foods or charity to be the samecannot discriminate, and they are foolish. There are missionary workerswho advocate that one can do whatever he likes and attain perfection.But these foolish guides are not acting according to the direction ofthe scripture. They are manufacturing ways and misleading the people ingeneral.
TEXT 8-10
ayuh-sattva-balarogya-
sukha-priti-vivardhanahrasyah snigdhah sthira hrdyaaharah sattvika-priyah
katv-amla-lavanaty-usna-
tiksna-ruksa-vidahinahahara rajasasyestaduhkha-sokamaya-pradah
yata-yamam gata-rasam
puti paryusitam ca yatucchistam api camedhyambhojanam tamasa-priyam
SYNONYMSayuh--duration of life; sattva--existence; bala--strength; arogya--
health; sukha--happiness; priti--satisfaction; vivardhanah--increasing;rasyah--juicy; snigdhah--fatty; sthirah--enduring; hrdyah--pleasing tothe heart; aharah--food; sattvika--goodness; priyah--palatable. katu--bitter; amla--sour; lavana--salty; ati-usna--very hot; tiksna--pungent;ruksa--dry; vidahinah--burning; aharah--food; rajasasya--in the mode ofpassion; istah--palatable; duhkha--distress; soka--misery; amayapradah--causing disease. yata-yamam--food cooked three hours beforebeing eaten; gata-rasam--tasteless; puti--bad smelling; paryusitam--decomposed; ca--also; yat--that which; ucchistam--remnants of foodeaten by others; api--also; ca--and; amedhyam--untouchable; bhojanam--eating; tamasa--in the mode of darkness; priyam--dear.
TRANSLATIONFoods in the mode of goodness increase the duration of life, purify
one's existence and give strength, health, happiness and satisfaction.Such nourishing foods are sweet, juicy, fatty and palatable. Foods thatare too bitter, too sour, salty, pungent, dry and hot, are liked bypeople in the mode of passion. Such foods cause pain, distress, anddisease. Food cooked more than three hours before being eaten, which istasteless, stale, putrid, decomposed and unclean, is food liked bypeople in the mode of ignorance.
PURPORT
The purpose of food is to increase the duration of life, purify the
mind and aid bodily strength. This is its only purpose. In the past,great authorities selected those foods that best aid health andincrease life's duration, such as milk products, sugar, rice, wheat,fruits and vegetables. These foods are very dear to those in the modeof goodness. Some other foods, such as baked corn and molasses, whilenot very palatable in themselves, can be made pleasant when mixed withmilk or other foods. They are then in the mode of goodness. All thesefoods are pure by nature. They are quite distinct from untouchablethings like meat and liquor. Fatty foods, as mentioned in the eighthverse, have no connection with animal fat obtained by slaughter. Animalfat is available in the form of milk, which is the most wonderful ofall foods. Milk, butter, cheese and similar products give animal fat ina form which rules out any need for the killing of innocent creatures.It is only through brute mentality that this killing goes on. Thecivilized method of obtaining needed fat is by milk. Slaughter is theway of subhumans. Protein is amply available through split peas, dal,whole wheat, etc.Foods in the mode of passion, which are bitter, too salty, or too hotor overly mixed with red pepper, cause misery by producing mucus in thestomach, leading to disease. Foods in the mode of ignorance or darknessare essentially those that are not fresh. Any food cooked more thanthree hours before it is eaten (except prasadam, food offered to theLord) is considered to be in the mode of darkness. Because they aredecomposing, such foods give a bad odor, which often attracts people inthis mode but repulses those in the mode of goodness.Remnants of food may be eaten only when they are part of a meal thatwas first offered to the Supreme Lord or first eaten by saintlypersons, especially the spiritual master. Otherwise the remnants offood are considered to be in the mode of darkness, and they increaseinfection or disease. Such foodstuffs, although very palatable topersons in the mode of darkness, are neither liked nor even touched bythose in the mode of goodness. The best food is the remnants of what isoffered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In Bhagavad-gita theSupreme Lord says that He accepts preparations of vegetables, flour andmilk when offered with devotion. Patram puspam phalam toyam. Of course,devotion and love are the chief things which the Supreme Personality ofGodhead accepts. But it is also mentioned that the prasadam should beprepared in a particular way. Any food prepared by the injunctions ofthe scripture and offered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead can betaken even if prepared long, long ago, because such food istranscendental. Therefore to make food antiseptic, eatable andpalatable for all persons, one should offer food to the SupremePersonality of Godhead.
TEXT 11
aphalakanksibhir yajno
vidhi-disto ya ijyateyastavyam eveti manahsamadhaya sa sattvikah
SYNONYMSaphala-akanksibhih--devoid of desire for result; yajnah--sacrifice;
vidhi--accordingly; distah--direction; yah--anyone; ijyate--performs;
yastavyam--must be performed; eva--certainly; iti--thus; manah--mind;
samadhaya--fixed in; sah--he; sattvikah--is in the mode of goodness.
TRANSLATIONOf sacrifices, that sacrifice performed according to duty and to
scriptural rules, and with no expectation of reward, is of the natureof goodness.
PURPORTThe general tendency is to offer sacrifice with some purpose in mind,
but here it is stated that sacrifice should be performed without anysuch desire. It should be done as a matter of duty. Take, for example,the performance of rituals in temples or in churches. Generally theyare performed with the purpose of material benefit, but that is not inthe mode of goodness. One should go to a temple or church as a matterof duty, offer respect to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and offerflowers and eatables. Everyone thinks that there is no use in going tothe temple just to worship God. But worship for economic benefit is notrecommended in the scriptural injunctions. One should go simply tooffer respect to the Deity. That will place one in the mode ofgoodness. It is the duty of every civilized man to obey the injunctionsof the scriptures and offer respect to the Supreme Personality ofGodhead.
TEXT 12
abhisandhaya tu phalam
dambhartham api caiva yatijyate bharata-sresthatam yajnam viddhi rajasam
SYNONYMSabhisandhaya--desiring; tu--but; phalam--the result; dambha--pride;
artham--for the sake of; api--also; ca--and; eva--certainly; yat--thatwhich; ijyate--worship; bharata-srestha--O chief of the Bharatas; tam--that; yajnam--sacrifice; viddhi--know; rajasam--in the mode of passion.
TRANSLATIONBut that sacrifice performed for some material end or benefit or
preformed ostentatiously, out of pride, is of the nature of passion, Ochief of the Bharatas.
PURPORTSometimes sacrifices and rituals are performed for elevation to the
heavenly kingdom or for some material benefits in this world. Suchsacrifices or ritualistic performances are considered to be in the modeof passion.
TEXT 13
vidhi-hinam asrstannam
mantra-hinam adaksinamsraddha-virahitam yajnam
tamasam paricaksate
SYNONYMSvidhi-hinam--without scriptural direction; asrsta-annam--without
distribution of prasadam; mantra-hinam--with no chanting of the Vedichymns; adaksinam--with no remunerations to the priests; sraddha--faith;virahitam--without; yajnam--sacrifice; tamasam--in the mode ofignorance; paricaksate--is to be considered.
TRANSLATIONAnd that sacrifice performed in defiance of scriptural injunctions, in
which no spiritual food is distributed, no hymns are chanted and noremunerations are made to the priests, and which is faithless--thatsacrifice if of the nature of ignorance.
PURPORTFaith in the mode of darkness or ignorance is actually faithlessness.
Sometimes people worship some demigod just to make money and then spendthe money for recreation, ignoring the scriptural injunctions. Suchceremonial shows of religiosity are not accepted as genuine. They areall in the mode of darkness; they produce a demoniac mentality and donot benefit human society.
TEXT 14
deva-dvija-guru-prajna-
pujanam saucam arjavambrahmacaryam ahimsa casariram tapa ucyate
SYNONYMSdeva--the Supreme Lord; dvija--the brahmana; guru--the spiritual
master; prajna--worshipable personalities; pujanam--worship; saucam--cleanliness; arjavam--simplicity; brahmacaryam--celibacy; ahimsa--nonviolence; ca--also; sariram--pertaining to the body; tapah--austerity; ucyate--is said to be.
TRANSLATIONThe austerity of the body consists of this: worship of the Supreme
Lord, the brahmanas, the spiritual master, and superiors like thefather and mother. Cleanliness, simplicity, celibacy and nonviolenceare also austerities of the body.
PURPORTThe Supreme Godhead here explains the different kinds of austerity and
penance. First He explains the austerities and penances practiced bythe body. One should offer, or learn to offer, respect to God or to thedemigods, the perfect, qualified brahmanas and the spiritual master andsuperiors like father, mother or any person who is conversant withVedic knowledge. These should be given proper respect. One shouldpractice cleansing oneself externally and internally, and he shouldlearn to become simple in behavior. He should not do anything which is
not sanctioned by the scriptural injunctions. He should not indulge in
sex outside of married life, for sex is sanctioned in the scripturesonly in marriage, not otherwise. This is called celibacy. These arepenances and austerities as far as the body is concerned.
TEXT 15
anudvega-karam vakyam
satyam priya-hitam ca yatsvadhyayabhyasanam caivavan-mayam tapa ucyate
SYNONYMSanudvega--not agitating; karam--producing; vakyam--words; satyam--
truthful; priya--dear; hitam--beneficial; ca--also; yat--which;svadhyaya--Vedic study; abhyasanam--practice; ca--also; eva--certainly;van-mayam--of the voice; tapah--austerity; ucyate--is said to be.
TRANSLATIONAusterity of speech consists in speaking truthfully and beneficially
and in avoiding speech that offends. One should also recite the Vedasregularly.
PURPORTOne should not speak in such a way as to agitate the minds of others.
Of course, when a teacher speaks, he can speak the truth for theinstruction of his students, but such a teacher should not speak toothers who are not his students if he will agitate their minds. This ispenance as far as talking is concerned. Besides that, one should nottalk nonsense. When speaking in spiritual circles, one's statementsmust be upheld by the scriptures. One should at once quote fromscriptural authority to back up what he is saying. At the same time,such talk should be very pleasurable to the ear. By such discussions,one may derive the highest benefit and elevate human society. There isa limitless stock of Vedic literature, and one should study this. Thisis called penance of speech.
TEXT 16
manah-prasadah saumyatvam
maunam atma-vinigrahahbhava-samsuddhir ity etattapo manasam ucyate
SYNONYMSmanah-prasadah--satisfaction of the mind; saumyatvam--without duplicity
towards others; maunam--gravity; atma--self; vinigrahah--control;bhava--nature; samsuddhih--purification; iti--thus; etat--that is;tapah--austerity; manasam--of the mind; ucyate--is said to be.
TRANSLATIONAnd satisfaction, simplicity, gravity, self-control and purity of
thought are the austerities of the mind.
PURPORT
To make the mind austere is to detach it from sense gratification. It
should be so trained that it can be always thinking of doing good forothers. The best training for the mind is gravity in thought. Oneshould not deviate from Krsna consciousness and must always avoid sensegratification. To purify one's nature is to become Krsna conscious.Satisfaction of the mind can be obtained only by taking the mind awayfrom thoughts of sense enjoyment. The more we think of sense enjoyment,the more the mind becomes dissatisfied. In the present age weunnecessarily engage the mind in so many different ways for sensegratification, and so there is no possibility of the mind's becomingsatisfied. The best course is to divert the mind to the Vedicliterature, which is full of satisfying stories, as in the Puranas andthe Mahabharata. One can take advantage of this knowledge and thusbecome purified. The mind should be devoid of duplicity, and one shouldthink of the welfare of all. Silence means that one is always thinkingof self-realization. The person in Krsna consciousness observes perfectsilence in this sense. Control of the mind means detaching the mindfrom sense enjoyment. One should be straightforward in his dealings andthereby purify his existence. All these qualities together constituteausterity in mental activities.
TEXT 17
sraddhaya paraya taptam
tapas tat tri-vidham naraihaphalakanksibhir yuktaihsattvikam paricaksate
SYNONYMSsraddhaya--with faith; paraya--transcendental; taptam--execution;
tapah--austerity; tat--that; tri-vidham--three kinds; naraih--by men;aphala-akanksibhih--without desires for fruits; yuktaih--engaged;sattvikam--in the mode of goodness; paricaksate--is called.
TRANSLATIONThis threefold austerity, practiced by men whose aim is not to benefit
themselves materially but to please the Supreme, is of the nature ofgoodness.
TEXT 18
satkara-mana-pujartham
tapo dambhena caiva yatkriyate tad iha proktamrajasam calam adhruvam
SYNONYMSsat-kara--respect; mana--honor; puja-artham--for worship; tapah--
austerity; dambhena--pride; ca--also; eva--certainly; yat--which is;kriyate--performed; tat--that; iha--in this world; proktam--is said;rajasam--in the mode of passion; calam--flickering; adhruvam--temporary.
TRANSLATION
Those ostentatious penances and austerities which are performed in
order to gain respect, honor and worship are said to be in the mode ofpassion. They are neither stable nor permanent.
PURPORTSometimes penance and austerity are executed to attract people and
receive honor, respect and worship from others. Persons in the mode ofpassion arrange to be worshiped by subordinates and let them wash theirfeet and offer riches. Such arrangements artificially made by theperformance of penances are considered to be in the mode of passion.The results are temporary; they can be continued for some time, butthey are not permanent.
TEXT 19
mudha-grahenatmano yat
pidaya kriyate tapahparasyotsadanartham vatat tamasam udahrtam
SYNONYMSmudha--foolish; grahena--with endeavor; atmanah--of one's own self;
yat--which; pidaya--by torture; kriyate--is performed; tapah--penance;parasya--to others; utsadana-artham--causing annihilation; va--or; tat--that; tamasam--in the mode of darkness; udahrtam--is said to be.
TRANSLATIONAnd those penances and austerities which are performed foolishly by
means of obstinate self-torture, or to destroy or injure others, aresaid to be in the mode of ignorance.
PURPORTThere are instances of foolish penance undertaken by demons like
Hiranyakasipu, who performed austere penances to become immortal andkill the demigods. He prayed to Brahma for such things, but ultimatelyhe was killed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. To undergopenances for something which is impossible is certainly in the mode ofignorance.
TEXT 20
datavyam iti yad danam
diyate 'nupakarinedese kale ca patre catad danam sattvikam smrtam
SYNONYMSdatavyam--worth giving; iti--thus; yat--that which; danam--charity;
diyate--given; anupakarine--to any person irrespective of doing good;dese--in place; kale--in time; ca--also; patre--suitable person; ca--
and; tat--that; danam--charity; sattvikam--in the mode of goodness;
smrtam--consider.
TRANSLATIONThat gift which is given out of duty, at the proper time and place, to
a worthy person, and without expectation of return, is considered to becharity in the mode of goodness.
PURPORTIn the Vedic literature, charity given to a person engaged in spiritual
activities is recommended. There is no recommendation for givingcharity indiscriminately. Spiritual perfection is always aconsideration. Therefore charity is recommended to be given at a placeof pilgrimage and at lunar or solar eclipses or at the end of the monthor to a qualified brahmana or a Vaisnava (devotee) or in temples. Suchcharities should be given without any consideration of return. Charityto the poor is sometimes given out of compassion, but if a poor man isnot worth giving charity to, then there is no spiritual advancement. Inother words, indiscriminate charity is not recommended in the Vedicliterature.
TEXT 21
yat tu pratyupakarartham
phalam uddisya va punahdiyate ca pariklistamtad danam rajasam smrtam
SYNONYMSyat--that which; tu--but; prati-upakara-artham--for the sake of getting
some return; phalam--result; uddisya--desiring; va--or; punah--again;diyate--is given in charity; ca--also; pariklistam--grudgingly; tat--that; danam--charity; rajasam--in the mode of passion; smrtam--isunderstood to be.
TRANSLATIONBut charity performed with the expectation of some return, or with a
desire for fruitive results, or in a grudging mood, is said to becharity in the mode of passion.
PURPORTCharity is sometimes performed for elevation to the heavenly kingdom
and sometimes with great trouble and with repentance afterwards. "Whyhave I spent so much in this way?" Charity is also sometimes givenunder some obligation, at the request of a superior. These kinds ofcharity are said to be in the mode of passion.There are many charitable foundations which offer their gifts toinstitutions where sense gratification goes on. Such charities are notrecommended in the Vedic scripture. Only charity in the mode ofgoodness is recommended.
TEXT 22
adesa-kale yad danam
apatrebhyas ca diyateasat-krtam avajnatamtat tamasam udahrtam
SYNONYMSadesa--unpurified place; kale--unpurified time; yat--that which; danam-
-charity; upatrebhyah--to unworthy persons; ca--also; diyate--is given;asat-krtam--without respect; avajnatam--without proper attention; tat--that; tamasam--in the mode of darkness; udahrtam--is said to be.
TRANSLATIONAnd charity performed at an improper place and time and given to
unworthy persons without respect and with contempt is charity in themode of ignorance.
PURPORTContributions for indulgence in intoxication and gambling are not
encouraged here. That sort of contribution is in the mode of ignorance.Such charity is not beneficial; rather, sinful persons are encouraged.Similarly, if a person gives charity to a suitable person withoutrespect and without attention, that sort of charity is also said to bein the mode of darkness.
TEXT 23
om tat sad iti nirdeso
brahmanas tri-vidhah smrtahbrahmanas tena vedas cayajnas ca vihitah pura
SYNONYMSom--indication of the Supreme; tat--that; sat--eternal; iti--that;
nirdesah--indication; brahmanah--of the Supreme; tri-vidhah--threekinds; smrtah--consider; brahmanah--the brahmanas; tena--therefore;vedah--the Vedic literature; ca--also; yajnah--sacrifice; ca--also;vihitah--used; pura--formerly.
TRANSLATIONFrom the beginning of creation, the three syllables--om tat sat--have
been used to indicate the Supreme Absolute Truth [Brahman]. They wereuttered by brahmanas while chanting Vedic hymns and during sacrifices,for the satisfaction of the Supreme.
PURPORTIt has been explained that penance, sacrifice, charity and foods are
divided into three categories: the modes of goodness, passion andignorance. But whether first class, second class or third class, theyare all conditioned, contaminated by the material modes of nature. Whenthey are aimed at the Supreme--om tat sat, the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, the eternal--they become means for spiritual elevation. In thescriptural injunctions such an objective is indicated. These three
words, om tat sat, particularly indicate the Absolute Truth, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the Vedic hymns, the word om isalways found.One who acts without following the regulations of the scriptures willnot attain the Absolute Truth. He will get some temporary result, butnot the ultimate end of life. The conclusion is that the performance ofcharity, sacrifice and penance must be done in the mode of goodness.Performed in the mode of passion and ignorance, they are certainlyinferior in quality. The three words om tat sat are uttered inconjunction with the holy name of the Supreme Lord, e.g., om tadvisnoh. Whenever a Vedic hymn or the holy name of the Supreme Lord isuttered, om is added. This is the indication of Vedic literature. Thesethree words are taken from Vedic hymns. Om ity etad brahmano nedisthamnama (Rg Veda) indicates the first goal. Then tat tvam asi (ChandogyaUpanisad 6.8.7) indicates the second goal. And sad eva saumya(Chandogya Upanisad 6.2.1) indicates the third goal. Combined theybecome om tat sat. Formerly when Brahma, the first created livingentity, performed sacrifices, he spoke these three names of the SupremePersonality of Godhead. The same principle holds by disciplicsuccession. So this hymn has great significance. Bhagavad-gitarecommends, therefore, that any work done should be done for om tatsat, or for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When one performspenance, charity, and sacrifice with these three words, he is acting inKrsna consciousness. Krsna consciousness is a scientific execution oftranscendental activities which enables one to return home, back toGodhead. There is no loss of energy in acting in such a transcendentalway.
TEXT 24
tasmad om ity udahrtya
yajna-dana-tapah-kriyahpravartante vidhanoktahsatatam brahma-vadinam
SYNONYMStasmat--therefore; om--beginning with om; iti--thus; udahrtya--
indicating; yajna--sacrifice; dana--charity; tapah--penance; kriyah--performances; pravartante--begin; vidhana-uktah--according toscriptural regulation; satatam--always; brahma-vadinam--of thetranscendentalists.
TRANSLATIONThus the transcendentalists undertake sacrifices, charities, and
penances, beginning always with om, to attain the Supreme.
PURPORTOm tad visnoh paramam padam (Rg Veda 1.22.20). The lotus feet of Visnu
are the supreme devotional platform. The performance of everything onbehalf of the Supreme Personality of Godhead assures the perfection ofall activity.
TEXT 25
tad ity anabhisandhaya
phalam yajna-tapah-kriyah
dana-kriyas ca vividhahkriyante moksa-kanksibhih
SYNONYMStat--that; iti--they; anabhisandhaya--without fruitive result; phalam--
result of sacrifice; yajna--sacrifice; tapah--penance; kriyah--activities; dana--charity; kriyah--activities; ca--also; vividhah--varieties; kriyante--done; moksa-kanksibhih--those who actually desireliberation.
TRANSLATIONOne should perform sacrifice, penance and charity with the word tat.
The purpose of such transcendental activities is to get free from thematerial entanglement.
PURPORTTo be elevated to the spiritual position, one should not act for any
material gain. Acts should be performed for the ultimate gain of beingtransferred to the spiritual kingdom, back to home, back to Godhead.
TEXTS 26-27
sad-bhave sadhu-bhave ca
sad ity etat prayujyateprasaste karmani tathasac-chabdah partha yujyate
yajne tapasi dane ca
sthitih sad iti cocyatekarma caiva tad-arthiyamsad ity evabhidhiyate
SYNONYMSsat-bhave--in the sense of the nature of the Supreme; sadhu-bhave--in
the sense of the nature of devotion; ca--also; sat--the supreme; iti--thus; etat--this; prayujyate--is used; prasaste--bona fide; karmani--activities; tatha--also; sat-sabdah--the sound sat; partha--O son ofPrtha; yujyate--is used; yajne--sacrifice; tapasi--in penance; dane--charity; ca--also; sthitih--situated; sat--the Supreme; iti--thus; ca--and; ucyate--pronounced; karma--work; ca--also; eva--certainly; tat--that; arthiyam--are meant; sat--Supreme; iti--thus; eva--certainly;abhidhiyate--is practiced.
TRANSLATIONThe Absolute Truth is the objective of devotional sacrifice, and it is
indicated by the word sat. These works of sacrifice, of penance and ofcharity, true to the absolute nature, are performed to please theSupreme Person, O son of Prtha.
PURPORT
The words prasaste karmani, or prescribed duties, indicate that there
are many activities prescribed in the Vedic literature which arepurificatory processes beginning from the parental care up to the endof one's life. Such purificatory processes are adopted for the ultimateliberation of the living entity. In all such activities it isrecommended that one should vibrate om tat sat. The words sad-bhave andsadhu-bhave indicate the transcendental situation. One who is acting inKrsna consciousness is called sattva, and one who is fully conscious ofthe activities in Krsna consciousness is called a sadhu. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.25.25) it is said that the transcendental subject matterbecomes clear in the association of the devotees. Without goodassociation one cannot achieve transcendental knowledge. Wheninitiating a person or offering the sacred thread, one vibrates thewords om tat sat. Similarly, in all kinds of yajna performances, thesupreme object, om tat sat is invoked. These words om tat sat are usedto perfect all activities. The supreme om tat sat makes everythingcomplete.
TEXT 28
asraddhaya hutam dattam
tapas taptam krtam ca yatasad ity ucyate parthana ca tat pretya no iha
SYNONYMSasraddhaya--without faith; hutam--offered in sacrifice; dattam--given;
tapah--penance; taptam--executed; krtam--performed; ca--also; yat--thatwhich; asat--false; iti--thus; ucyate--is said to be; partha--O son ofPrtha; na--never; ca--also; tat--that; pretya--after death; no--nor;iha--in this life.
TRANSLATIONBut sacrifices, austerities and charities performed without faith in
the Supreme are nonpermanent, O son of Prtha, regardless of whateverrites are performed. They are called asat and are useless both in thislife and the next.
PURPORTAnything done without the transcendental objective--whether it be
sacrifice, charity or penance--is useless. Therefore, in this verse, itis declared that such activities are abominable. Everything should bedone for the Supreme in Krsna consciousness. Without such faith, andwithout the proper guidance, there can never be any fruit. In all theVedic scriptures, faith in the Supreme is advised. In the pursuit ofall Vedic instructions, the ultimate goal is the understanding ofKrsna. No one can obtain success without following this principle.Therefore, the best course is to work from the very beginning in Krsnaconsciousness under the guidance of a bona fide spiritual master. Thatis the way to make everything successful.In the conditional state, people are attracted to worship demigods,ghosts, or Yaksas like Kuvera. The mode of goodness is better than themodes of passion and ignorance, but one who takes directly to Krsnaconsciousness is transcendental to all three modes of material nature.Although there is a process of gradual elevation, if one, by the
