Name: ___________________________________________ Date: ___________________
Bhagavadgita-chapter-6
1. Who is the true mystic? BG 6.1
One who is unattached to the fruits of his work and who works as he is obligated is in the renounced order of life, and he is the
true mystic,
2. What The criterion of perfection to enjoying the fruits of work? BG 6.1
The criterion of perfection is to act in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness, and not with a view to enjoying the fruits of work.
3. Who is the perfect sannyāsī, the perfect yogī? BG 6.1
the living entity who acts for satisfaction of the supreme whole and not for personal satisfaction is the perfect sannyāsī, the
perfect yogī.
4. What is Real sannyāsa-yoga or bhakti means? Bg 6.2
Real sannyāsa-yoga or bhakti means that one should know his constitutional position as the living entity, and act accordingly.
5. What is The real aim is for a living entity? BG 6.1
The real aim is for a living entity to give up all selﬁsh satisfaction and to be prepared to satisfy the Supreme.
6. For what kind of person work is said to be the means? BG 6.3
For one who is a neophyte in the eightfold yoga system, work is said to be the means
7. For what kind of person cessation of all material activities is said to be the means? BG 6.3
for one who is already elevated in yoga, cessation of all material activities is said to be the means.
8. What stage is called of yoga is called yogāruruk ṣ u stage? BG 6.3
The beginning of the ladder is called the yogāruruk ṣ u stage,
9. What is called yogārū ḍ ha stage? BG 6.3
the highest rung is called yogārū ḍ ha.
10. Which mental activity achieving perfect mental equilibrium to control the senses? BG 6.3
Concerning the eightfold yoga system are considered fruitive material activities.
11. When A person is said to be elevated in yoga? BG 6.4
having renounced all material desires, he neither acts for sense gratiﬁcation nor engages in fruitive activities.
12. What The word ātmā denotes? BG 6.5
The word ātmā denotes body, mind and soul
13. How a conditioned soul may be saved? bG 6.5
the mind should be trained so that it will not be attracted by the glitter of material nature, and in this way the conditioned soul
may be saved.
14. How mind is cause of bondage for men? BG 6.5
For man, mind is the cause of bondage and mind is the cause of liberation. Mind absorbed in sense objects is the cause of
bondage, and mind detached from the sense objects is the cause of liberation.
15. How can mind be best friend or enemy? Bg 6.6
For him who has conquered the mind, the mind is the best of friends; but for one who has failed to do so, his mind will remain
the greatest enemy.
16. What is the Real yoga practice entails? BG 6.6
Real yoga practice entails meeting the Paramātmā within the heart and then following His dictation
17. Who is unaffected by the dualities of material existence? BG 6.7
the devotee of the Lord is unaffected by the dualities of material existence, namely distress and happiness, cold and heat, etc.
18. What kind of person sees everything – whether it be pebbles, stones or gold – as the same? BG 6.8
a yogī when he is fully satisﬁed by virtue of acquired knowledge and realization He sees everything – whether it be pebbles,
stones or gold – as the same.
19. Why K ṛṣṇ a consciousness is the perfect yogī? BG 6.10
He is always aloof from material things because he is always transcendental, and he is always alone, having nothing to do with
persons not in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness. Therefore a person in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness is the perfect yogī.
20. What is Sacred place refers to? Bg 6.11-12
refers to places of pilgrimage
21. Name few pilgrimage places of India? BG 6.11-12
sacred places such as Prayāga, Mathurā, V ṛ ndāvana, H ṛṣ īkeśa and Hardwar
22. Name few sacred rivers of India? BG 6.11-12
the sacred rivers like the Yamunā and the Ganges
23. in Kali-yuga what is the best means of spiritual realization? Bg 6.11-12
In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance is chanting the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way.
24. What is the object of yoga practice? ^.13-14
the vi ṣṇ u-mūrti situated in one’s heart is the object of yoga practice.
25. What is The ultimate goal in practicing yoga ? Bg 6.15
Yoga practice is not meant for attaining any kind of material facility; it is to enable the cessation of all material existence.
26. What is called para ṁ dhāma, or superior abodes.? BG 6.15
that place where there is no need of sun, moon or electricity. All the planets in the spiritual kingdom are self-illuminated like
the sun in the material sky. the spiritual sky and the planets thereof are called para ṁ dhāma, or superior abodes.
27. How One can overcome the path of birth and death? BG 6.15
One can overcome the path of birth and death only by understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead, K ṛṣṇ a.
28. What is recommended herein for the yogīs? BG 6.16
Regulation of diet and sleep is recommended herein for the yogīs.
29. Who will suffer sinful reactions because of eating only polluted things? Bg 6.16
those who indulge in animal food, drinking, smoking and eating food which is not ﬁrst offered to K ṛṣṇ a will suffer sinful reactions
because of eating only polluted things.
30. What kind of person inﬂuenced by the mode of ignorance? BG 6.16
One who sleeps more than six hours out of twenty-four is certainly inﬂuenced by the mode of ignorance.
31. How one can regulated in his habits of eating, sleeping, recreation and work? BG 6.17
He who is regulated in his habits of eating, sleeping, recreation and work can mitigate all material pains by practicing the yoga
system.
32. Who is said to be well established in yoga? BG 6.17
When the yogī, by practice of yoga, disciplines his mental activities and becomes situated in transcendence – devoid of all
material desires – he is said to be well established in yoga.
33. How King Ambarī ṣ a engaged his mind on the lotus feet of Lord K ṛṣṇ a? BG 6.18
he engaged his words in describing the transcendental qualities of the Lord, his hands in mopping the temple of the Lord, his ears
in hearing of the activities of the Lord, his eyes in seeing the transcendental forms of the Lord, his body in touching the bodies of
the devotees, his sense of smell in smelling the scents of the lotus ﬂowers offered to the Lord, his tongue in tasting the tulasī
leaf offered at the lotus feet of the Lord, his legs in going to places of pilgrimage and the temple of the Lord, his head in offering
obeisances unto the Lord, and his desires in executing the mission of the Lord. All these transcendental activities are quite
beﬁtting a pure devotee.
34. What is called arcana? BG 6.18
engaging all the senses in the service of the Lord
35. What is called yukta in the Bhagavad-gītā? BG 6.18
transcendental engagement of the senses and the mind is the perfect process for transcendental achievement, which is called
yukta in the Bhagavad-gītā.
36. Who`s mind is compared to as steady as a lamp in a windless place? BG 6.19
A truly K ṛṣṇ a conscious person, always absorbed in transcendence is as steady as a lamp in a windless place.
37. What is the primary characteristic of the yoga principle? BG 6.20-23
By practice of yoga one becomes gradually detached from material concepts. This is the primary characteristic of the yoga
principle.
38. What is Puru ṣ ārtha means? Bg 6.20-23
Puru ṣ ārtha means material religiosity, economic development, sense gratiﬁcation and, at the end, the attempt to become one
with the Supreme.
39. What is the meaning of kaivalyam by the monist? Bg 6.20-23
oneness with the Supreme” is called kaivalyam by the monist. But according to Patañjali, this kaivalyam is an internal, or
transcendental, potency by which the living entity becomes aware of his constitutional position.
40. What is nirvā ṇ a? Bg 6.20-23
material cessation
41. What are the two kinds of samādhi? BG 6.20-23
samprajñāta-samādhi and asamprajñāta-samādhi.
42. Who is said to have achieved samprajñāta-samādhi? Bg 6.20-23
When one becomes situated in the transcendental position by various philosophical researches, he is said to have achieved
samprajñāta-samādhi.
43. What is asamprajñāta-samādhi? Bg 6.20-23
In the asamprajñāta-samādhi there is no longer any connection with mundane pleasure, for one is then transcendental to all sorts
of happiness derived from the senses.
44. What kind of The yoga practitioner Success is sure? Bg 6.24
Success is sure for the rigid practitioner
45. What happened to sparrow`s egg? Bg 6.24
sparrow laid her eggs on the shore of the ocean, but the big ocean carried away the eggs on its waves.
46. Did the ocean to return sparrow`s eggs? Bg 6.24
The ocean did not even consider her appeal.
47. Who promised to help sparrow? Bg 6.24
Garu ḍ a, the gigantic bird carrier of Lord Vi ṣṇ u promised to help sparrow.
48. How the sparrow became happy by the grace of Garu ḍ a? Bg 6.24
Thus Garu ḍ a at once asked the ocean to return her eggs lest he himself take up the work of the sparrow. The ocean was
frightened at this, and returned the eggs.
49. Why God helps those who help themselves? BG 6.24
K ṛṣṇa consciousness, may appear to be a very difﬁcult job. But if anyone follows the principles with great determination, the
Lord will surely help,
50. What is called pratyāhāra? Bg 6.25
By proper conviction and intelligence one should gradually cease sense activities. This is called pratyāhāra.
51. What is trance, or samādhi? Bg 6.25
The mind, being controlled by conviction, meditation and cessation from the senses, should be situated in trance, or samādhi.
52. Who is called gosvāmī, or svāmī? Bg 6.26
One who controls the mind (and therefore the senses as well) is called gosvāmī, or svāmī,
53. Who is called go-dāsa, or the servant of the senses? BG 6.26
one who is controlled by the mind is called go-dāsa, or the servant of the senses.
54. Which state is called Brahma-bhūta ? BG 6.27
Brahma-bhūta is the state of being free from material contamination and situated in the transcendental service of the Lord.
55. What is Self-realization means? BG 6.28
Self-realization means knowing one’s constitutional position in relationship to the Supreme.
56. What is called brahma-sa ṁ sparśa? BG 6.28
The individual soul is part and parcel of the Supreme, and his position is to render transcendental service to the Lord. This
transcendental contact with the Supreme is called brahma-sa ṁ sparśa.
57. What are the primarily, two energies Lord has? Bg 6.29
the spiritual (or superior) and the material (or inferior) energy.
58. Is K ṛṣṇ a conscious person different from Yogi? Bg 6.31
There is no difference between a K ṛṣṇ a conscious person always engaged in the transcendental loving service of K ṛṣṇ a and a
perfect yogī engaged in meditation on the Supersoul.
59. What is the highest stage of trance in yoga practice? Bg 6.31
K ṛṣṇa consciousness is the highest stage of trance in yoga practice.
60. Who is perfect yogī ? BG 6.32
One who is K ṛṣṇ a conscious is a perfect yogī he is aware of everyone’s happiness and distress by dint of his own personal
experience.
61. What is the cause of the distress of a living entity? BG 6.32
The cause of the distress of a living entity is forgetfulness of his relationship with God
62. What is the cause of happiness? Bg 6.32
the cause of happiness is knowing K ṛṣṇ a to be the supreme enjoyer of all the activities of the human being,
63. What is being rejected by Arjuna out of a feeling of inability? BG 6.33
The system of mysticism described by Lord K ṛṣṇ a to Arjuna beginning with the words śucau deśe and ending with yogī parama ḥ is
here being rejected by Arjuna out of a feeling of inability.
64. what is more difﬁcult than controlling the wind? bg 6.34
one may establish a mental equilibrium toward both friend and enemy, but ultimately no worldly man can do so, for this is more
difﬁcult than controlling the raging wind.
65. What is the easiest way to control the mind, as suggested by Lord Caitanya? BG 6.34
is chanting “Hare K ṛṣṇ a,” the great mantra for deliverance, in all humility.
66. How to curb the restless mind? BG 6.35
but it is possible by suitable practice and by detachment
67. What is that practice? BG 6.35
focusing the mind on the Supersoul, restraining the senses and mind, observing celibacy, remaining alone, etc.
68. What is Vairāgya means ? BG 6.35
Vairāgya means detachment from matter and engagement of the mind in spirit.
69. What is called pareśānubhava? BG 6.35
by hearing about K ṛṣṇ a one becomes automatically attached to the Supreme Spirit. This attachment is called pareśānubhava,
70. Who cannot achieve success without becoming K ṛṣṇ a conscious? BG 6.36
a yoga practitioner cannot achieve success without becoming K ṛṣṇ a conscious.
71. Who can easily achieves the result of yoga practice without separate endeavor? BG 6.36
A K ṛṣṇ a conscious person easily achieves the result of yoga practice without separate endeavor,
72. What is the basic principle of self-realization? Bg 6.37
The basic principle of self-realization is knowledge that the living entity is not this material body but that he is different from it
and that his happiness is in eternal life, bliss and knowledge.
73. What are the three methods one to reach the supreme goal? BG 6.37
one has to realize the constitutional position of the living entity, his relationship with God, and the activities whereby he can
reestablish the lost link and achieve the highest perfectional stage of K ṛṣṇ a consciousness.
74. What is called yogāc calita-mānasa ḥ ? BG 6.37
deviation from the transcendental path.
75. What are two ways to progress? BG 6.38
materialists and transcendence
76. What is the materialists way of progress? BG 6.38
Those who are materialists have no interest in transcendence; therefore they are more interested in material advancement by
economic development, or in promotion to the higher planets by appropriate work.
77. What is the transcendence way of progress? Bg 6.38
When one takes to the path of transcendence, one has to cease all material activities and sacriﬁce all forms of so-called material
happiness.
78. What happenes when transcendentalist fails? BG 6.38
If the aspiring transcendentalist fails, then he apparently loses both ways; in other words, he can enjoy neither material
happiness nor spiritual success. He has no position; he is like a riven cloud.
79. What is the meaning of riven cloud? BG 6.38
A cloud in the sky sometimes deviates from a small cloud and joins a big one.
80. What is the meaning of brahma ṇ a ḥ pathi ? BG 6.38
The brahma ṇ a ḥ pathi is the path of transcendental realization through knowing oneself to be spiritual in essence, part and parcel
of the Supreme Lord,
81. Why the verdict of K ṛṣṇ a is the ﬁnal? BG 6.39
No one is equal to or above K ṛṣṇ a, and certainly the so-called great sages and philosophers who are at the mercy of material
nature cannot equal Him. Therefore the verdict of K ṛṣṇ a is the ﬁnal
82. Why K ṛṣṇ a conscious devotees alone can know what is what? BG 6.39
K ṛṣṇa is the ﬁnal and complete answer to all doubts, because He knows past, present and future perfectly – but no one knows
Him. K ṛṣṇ a and K ṛṣṇ a conscious devotees alone can know what is what.
83. Humanity is divided in to how many sections? BG 6.40
A. 3 B. 2 
C. 4 D. 5
84. What are the two sections of Humanity? BG 6.40
the regulated and the nonregulated humanity
85. Who belongs to nonregulated section? BG 6.40
Those who are engaged simply in bestial sense gratiﬁcations without knowledge of their next life or spiritual salvation belong to
the nonregulated section.
86. Who belongs to regulated section? BG 6.40
those who follow the principles of prescribed duties in the scriptures are classiﬁed amongst the regulated section.
87. What are the three section of auspiciousness? BG 6.40
(1) the followers of scriptural rules and regulations who are enjoying material prosperity, (2) those who are trying to ﬁnd
ultimate liberation from material existence, and (3) those who are devotees in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness.
88. What are the two classes of unsuccessful yogīs? BG 6.41
one is fallen after very little progress, and one is fallen after long practice of yoga.
89. What is the progress of The yogī who falls after a short period of practice ? BG 6.41
goes to the higher planets, where pious living entities are allowed to enter. After prolonged life there, one is sent back again to
this planet, to take birth in the family of a righteous brāhma ṇ a Vai ṣṇ ava or of aristocratic merchants.
90. What is the progress of yogi one is fallen after long practice of yoga? BG 6.41
they are given opportunities to live prosperous lives in righteous or aristocratic families. Those who are born in such families may
take advantage of the facilities and try to elevate themselves to full K ṛṣṇ a consciousness.
91. What is the advantage of Birth in a family of yogīs or transcendentalists ? Bg 6.42
those with great wisdom – is praised herein because the child born in such a family receives a spiritual impetus from the very
beginning of his life.
92. Who an example of good birth for the revival of previous transcendental consciousness? BG 6.43
King Bharata, who took his third birth in the family of a good brāhma ṇ a, is an example of above question.
93. What is known as Bhārata-var ṣ a? BG 6.43
King Bharata was the emperor of the world, and since his time this planet has been known among the demigods as Bhārata-var ṣ a.
94. Why king Bharata in his next life known as Ja ḍa Bharata? BG 6.43
because he always remained secluded and did not talk to anyone.
95. How one can get complete perfection in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness? BG 6.43
the practice of yoga, never go in vain. By the grace of the Lord the transcendentalist gets repeated opportunities for complete
perfection in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness.
96. Who is far advanced in spiritual life? Bg 6.44
Persons who chant the holy names of Lordship are far, far advanced in spiritual life, even if born in families of dog-eaters.
97. Who was Ṭ hākura Haridāsa ? Bg 6.44
Ṭhākura Haridāsa happened to take his birth in a Muslim family,
98. who accepted Ṭ hākura Haridāsa as one of His most important disciples? BG 6.44
Lord Caitanya,
99. Why Ṭ hākura Haridāsa was elevated to the post of nāmācārya by Lord Caitanya? BG 6.44
due to his rigidly attended principle of chanting three hundred thousand holy names of the Lord daily: Hare K ṛṣṇ a, Hare K ṛṣṇ a,
K ṛṣṇa K ṛṣṇ a, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.
100. Why Thakura Haridasa is understood that in his previous life he must have passed through all the ritualistic methods of the Vedas? BG 6.44
because he chanted the holy name of the Lord constantly, chanting three hundred thousand holy names of the Lord daily
101. How one becomes engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord? BG 6.45
After many, many births of executing pious activities, when one is completely freed from all contaminations, and from all illusory
dualities,
102. Why A yogī is great in all circumstances? Bg 6.46
A yogī is greater than the ascetic, greater than the empiricist and greater than the fruitive worker. Therefore a yogi is great in
all circumstances.
103. According to Lord krishna openion who is the highest of all? Bg 6.47
Lord says of all yogīs, the one with great faith who always abides in Me, thinks of Me within himself and renders transcendental
loving service to Me – he is the most intimately united with Me in yoga and is the highest of all.
104. What kind on person will certainly fall down from his constitutional position? BG 6.47
Anyone who does not render service and neglects his duty unto the primeval Lord, who is the source of all living entities, will
certainly fall down from his constitutional position.
