bona fide spiritual master and from him begins to hear and chant and
observe the regulative principles of devotional service with faith,attachment and devotion and thus becomes engaged in the transcendentalservice of the Lord. This path is recommended in this chapter;therefore there is no doubt that devotional service is the onlyabsolute path for self-realization, for the attainment of the SupremePersonality of Godhead. The impersonal conception of the SupremeAbsolute Truth, as described in this chapter, is recommended only up tothe time one surrenders himself for self-realization. In other words,as long as one does not have the chance to associate with a puredevotee, the impersonal conception may be beneficial. In the impersonalconception of the Absolute Truth one works without fruitive result,meditates and cultivates knowledge to understand spirit and matter.This is necessary as long as one is not in the association of a puredevotee. Fortunately, if one develops directly a desire to engage inKrsna consciousness in pure devotional service, he does not need toundergo step by step improvements in spiritual realization. Devotionalservice, as described in the middle six chapters of the Bhagavad-gita,is more congenial. One need not bother about materials to keep body andsoul together because by the grace of the Lord everything is carriedout automatically.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Twelfth Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Devotional Service.
Chapter 13
Nature, the Enjoyer, and Consciousness
TEXTS 1-2
arjuna uvaca
prakrtim purusam caivaksetram ksetra-jnam eva caetad veditum icchamijnanam jneyam ca kesava
sri-bhagavan uvaca
idam sariram kaunteyaksetram ity abhidhiyateetad yo vetti tam prahuhksetra-jna iti tad-vidah
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; prakrtim--nature; purusam--the enjoyer; ca-
-also; eva--certainly; ksetram--body; ksetra-jnam--knower of the body;eva--certainly; ca--also; etat--all this; veditum--to understand;icchami--I wish; jnanam--knowledge; jneyam--the object of knowledge;ca--also; kesava--O Krsna; sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Personality ofGodhead said; idam--this; sariram--body; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;ksetram--the field; iti--thus; abhidhiyate--is called; etat--this; yah--anyone; vetti--knows; tam--he; prahuh--is called; ksetra-jnah--knowerof the body; iti--thus; tat-vidah--one who knows.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: O my dear Krsna, I wish to know about prakrti [nature],
purusa [the enjoyer], and the field and the knower of the field, and ofknowledge and of the end of knowledge.The Blessed Lord said: This body, O son of Kunti, is called the field,and one who knows this body is called the knower of the field.
PURPORTArjuna was inquisitive about prakrtil, or nature, purusa, the enjoyer,
ksetra, the field, ksetra-jna, its knower, and of knowledge and theobject of knowledge. When he inquired about all these, Krsna said thatthis body is called the field and that one who knows this body iscalled the knower of the field. This body is the field of activity forthe conditioned soul. The conditioned soul is entrapped in materialexistence, and he attempts to lord over material nature. And so,according to his capacity to dominate material nature, he gets a fieldof activity. That field of activity is the body. And what is the body?The body is made of senses. The conditioned soul wants to enjoy sensegratification, and, according to his capacity to enjoy sensegratification, he is offered a body, or field of activity. Thereforethe body is called ksetra, or the field of activity for the conditionedsoul. Now, the person who identifies himself with the body, is calledksetra-jna, the knower of the field. It is not very difficult tounderstand the difference between the field and its knower, the bodyand the knower of the body. Any person can consider that from childhoodto old age he undergoes so many changes of body and yet is still oneperson, remaining. Thus there is a difference between the knower of thefield of activities and the actual field of activities. A livingconditioned soul can thus understand that he is different from thebody. It is described in the beginning--dehino 'smin--that the livingentity is within the body and that the body is changing from childhoodto boyhood and from boyhood to youth and from youth to old age, and theperson who owns the body knows that the body is changing. The owner isdistinctly ksetra-jna. Sometimes we understand that, "I am happy," "Iam a man," "I am a woman," "I am a dog," "I am a cat." These are thebodily designations of the knower. But the knower is different from thefield. Although we use many articles--our clothes, etc.--we know thatwe are different from the things used. Similarly, we also understand bya little contemplation that we are different from the body.In the first six chapters of Bhagavad-gita the knower of the body, theliving entity, and the position by which he can understand the SupremeLord are described. In the middle six chapters of the Gita, the SupremePersonality of Godhead and the relationship between the individual souland the Supersoul in regard to devotional service are described. Thesuperior position of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and thesubordinate position of the individual soul are definitely defined inthese chapters. The living entities are subordinate under allcircumstances, but in their forgetfulness they are suffering. Whenenlightened by pious activities, they approach the Supreme Lord indifferent capacities--as the distressed, those in want of money, theinquisitive, and those in search of knowledge. That is also described.Now, starting with the Thirteenth Chapter, how the living entity comesin contact with material nature, how he is delivered by the SupremeLord through the different methods of fruitive activities, cultivationof knowledge, and the discharge of devotional service are explained.Although the living entity is completely different from the materialbody, he somehow becomes related. This also is explained.
TEXT 3
ksetra-jnam capi mam viddhi
sarva-ksetresu bharataksetra-ksetrajnayor jnanamyat taj jnanam matam mama
SYNONYMSksetra-jnam--the knower; ca--also; api--certainly; mam--Me; viddhi--
know; sarva--all; ksetresu--in bodily fields; bharata--O son ofBharata; ksetra--field of activities (the body); ksetra-jnayoh--theknower of the field; jnanam--knowledge; yat--that which is taught; tat--that; jnanam--knowledge; matam--opinion; mama--that.
TRANSLATIONO scion of Bharata, you should understand that I am also the knower in
all bodies, and to understand this body and its knower is calledknowledge. That is My opinion.
PURPORTWhile discussing the subject of this body and the knower of the body,
the soul and the Supersoul, we shall find three different topics ofstudy: the Lord, the living entity, and matter. In every field ofactivities, in every body, there are two souls: the individual soul andthe Supersoul. Because the Supersoul is the plenary expansion of theSupreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, Krsna says, "I am also theknower, but I am not the individual knower of the body. I am thesuperknower. I am present in every body as the Paramatma, orSupersoul."One who studies the subject matter of the field of activity and theknower of the field very minutely, in terms of this Bhagavad-gita, canattain to knowledge.The Lord says, "I am the knower of the field of activities in everyindividual body." The individual may be the knower of his own body, buthe is not in knowledge of other bodies. The Supreme Personality ofGodhead, who is present as the Supersoul in all bodies, knowseverything about all bodies. He knows all the different bodies of allthe various species of life. A citizen may know everything about hispatch of land, but the king knows not only his palace but also all theproperties possessed by the individual citizens. Similarly, one may bethe proprietor of the body individually, but the Supreme Lord is theproprietor of all bodies. The king is the original proprietor of thekingdom, and the citizen is the secondary proprietor. Similarly, theSupreme Lord is the supreme proprietor of all bodies.The body consists of the senses. The Supreme Lord is Hrsikesa, Whichmeans "the controller of the senses." He is the original controller ofthe senses, just as the king is the original controller of all theactivities of the state; the citizens are secondary controllers. TheLord says, "I am also the knower." This means that He is thesuperknower; the individual soul knows only his particular body. In theVedic literature, it is stated as follows:
ksetrani hi sarirani
bijam capi subhasubhetani vetti sa yogatma
tatah ksetra-jna ucyate
This body is called the ksetra, and within it dwells the owner of the
body and the Supreme Lord who knows both the body and the owner of thebody. Therefore He is called the knower of all fields. The distinctionbetween the field of activities, the knower of activities, and thesupreme knower of activities is described as follows. Perfect knowledgeof the constitution of the body, the constitution of the individualsoul, and the constitution of the Supersoul is known in terms of Vedicliterature as jnana. That is the opinion of Krsna. To understand boththe soul and the Supersoul as one yet distinct is knowledge. One whodoes not understand the field of activity and the knower of activity isnot in perfect knowledge. One has to understand the position ofprakrti, nature, purusa, the enjoyer of the nature, and isvara, theknower who dominates or controls nature and the individual soul. Oneshould not confuse the three in their different capacities. One shouldnot confuse the painter, the painting and the easel. This materialworld, which is the field of activities, is nature, and the enjoyer ofnature is the living entity, and above them both is the supremecontroller, the Personality of Godhead. It is stated in the Vediclanguage (in the Svetasvatara Upanisad 1.12), bhokta bhogyam preritaramca matva. sarvam proktam tri vidham-brahmam etat. There are threeBrahman conceptions: prakrti is Brahman as the field of activities, andthe jiva (individual soul) is also Brahman and is trying to controlmaterial nature, and the controller of both of them is also Brahman,but He is the factual controller.In this chapter it will be also explained that out of the two knowers,one is fallible and the other is infallible. One is superior and theother is subordinate. One who understands the two knowers of the fieldto be one and the same contradicts the Supreme Personality of Godhead,who states here very clearly, "I am also the knower of the field ofactivity." One who misunderstands a rope to be a serpent is not inknowledge. There are different kinds of bodies, and there are differentowners of the bodies. Because each individual soul has his individualcapacity for lording it over material nature, there are differentbodies. But the Supreme also is present in them as the controller. Theword ca is significant for it indicates the total number of bodies.That is the opinion of Srila Baladeva Vidyabhusana: Krsna is theSupersoul present in each and every body apart from the individualsoul. And Krsna explicitly says here that the Supersoul is thecontroller of both the field of activities and the finite enjoyer.
TEXT 4
tat ksetram yac ca yadrk ca
yad-vikari yatas ca yatsa ca yo yat-prabhavas catat samasena me srnu
SYNONYMStat--that; ksetram--field of activities; yat--as; ca--also; yadrk--as
it is; ca--also; yat--what is; vikari--changes; yatah--from which; ca--also; yat--which; sah--he; ca--also; yah--one; yat--which; prabhavahca--influence also; tat--that; samasena--in summary; me--from Me; srnu--understand.
TRANSLATION
Now please hear My brief description of this field of activity and how
it is constituted, what its changes are, whence it is produced, whothat knower of the field of activities is, and what his influences are.
PURPORTThe Lord is describing the field of activities and the knower of the
field of activities in their constitutional positions. One has to knowhow this body is constituted, the materials of which this body is made,under whose control this body is working, how the changes are takingplace, wherefrom the changes are coming, what the causes are, what thereasons are, what the ultimate goal of the individual soul is, and whatthe actual form of the individual soul is. One should also know thedistinction between the individual living soul and the Supersoul, theirdifferent influences, their potentials, etc. One just has to understandthis Bhagavad-gita directly from the description given by the SupremePersonality of Godhead, and all this will be clarified. But one shouldbe careful not to consider the Supreme Personality of Godhead in everybody and individual soul to be the jiva. This is something likeequalizing the potent and the impotent.
TEXT 5
rsibhir bahudha gitam
chandobhir vividhaih prthakbrahma-sutra-padais caivahetumadbhir viniscitaih
SYNONYMSrsibhih--by the wise sages; bahudha--in many ways; gitam--described;
chandobhih--Vedic hymns; vividhaih--in various; prthak--variously;brahma-sutra--the Vedanta; padaih--aphorisms; ca--also; eva--certainly;hetu-madbhih--with cause and effect; viniscitaih--ascertain.
TRANSLATIONThat knowledge of the field of activities and of the knower of
activities is described by various sages in various Vedic writings--especially in the Vedanta-sutra--and is presented with all reasoning asto cause and effect.
PURPORTThe Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is the highest authority in
explaining this knowledge. Still, as a matter of course, learnedscholars and standard authorities always give evidence from previousauthorities. Krsna is explaining this most controversial pointregarding the duality and nonduality of the soul and the Supersoul byreferring to the scriptures, the Vedanta, which are accepted asauthority. First, He says, "This is according to different sages." Asfar as the sages are concerned, besides Himself, Vyasadeva, the authorof the Vedanta-sutra, is a great sage, and in the Vedanta-sutra dualityis perfectly explained. And Vyasadeva's father, Parasara, was also agreat sage, and he writes in his books of religiosity: aham tvam catathanye... "we--you, I and the various other living entities--are alltranscendental, although in material bodies. Now we are fallen into the
ways of the three modes of material nature according to our different
karma. As such, some are on higher levels, and some are in the lowernature. The higher and lower natures exist due to ignorance and arebeing manifested in an infinite number of living entities. But theSupersoul, which is infallible, is uncontaminated by the threequalities of nature and is transcendental." Similarly, in the originalVedas, a distinction between the soul, the Supersoul and the body ismade, especially in the Katha Upanisad.There is a manifestation of the Supreme Lord's energy known as anna-maya, by which one depends simply upon food for existence. This is amaterialistic realization of the Supreme. Then there is prana-maya;this means that after realizing the Supreme Absolute Truth infoodstuff, one can realize the Absolute Truth in the living symptoms,or life forms. In jnana-maya the living symptom develops to the pointof thinking, feeling and willing. Then there is Brahman realization andrealization called vijnana-maya by which the living entity's mind andlife symptoms are distinguished from the living entity himself. Thenext and supreme stage is ananda-maya, realization of the all-blissfulnature. Thus there are five stages of Brahman realization, which arecalled brahma puccham. Out of these the first three--anna-maya, prana-maya and jnana-maya--involve the fields of activities of the livingentities. Transcendental to all these fields of activities is theSupreme Lord, who is called ananda-maya. In the Vedanta-sutra also theSupreme is called, ananda-mayo 'bhyasat: the Supreme Personality ofGodhead is by nature full of joy, and to enjoy His transcendentalbliss, He expands into vijnana-maya, prana-maya, jnana-maya, and anna-maya. In this field of activities the living entity is considered to bethe enjoyer, and different from him is the ananda-maya. That means thatif the living entity decides to enjoy, in dovetailing himself with theananda-maya, then he becomes perfect. This is the real picture of theSupreme Lord, as the supreme knower of the field, the living entity asthe subordinate knower, and the nature of the field of activities.
TEXTS 6-7
maha-bhutany ahankaro
buddhir avyaktam eva caindriyani dasaikam capanca cendriya-gocarah
iccha dvesah sukham duhkham
sanghatas cetana dhrtihetat ksetram samasenasa-vikaram udahrtam
SYNONYMSmaha-bhutani--great elements; ahankarah--false ego; buddhih--
intelligence; avyaktam--the unmanifested; eva--certainly; ca--also;indriyani--senses; dasa-ekam--eleven; ca--also; panca--five; ca--also;indriya-go-carah--objects of the senses; iccha--desire; dvesah--hatred;sukham--happiness; duhkham--distress; sanghatah--the aggregate; cetana--living symptoms; dhrtih--conviction; etat--all this; ksetram--thefield of activities; samasena--in summary; sa-vikaram--interaction;udahrtam--exemplified.
TRANSLATION
The five great elements, false ego, intelligence, the unmanifested, the
ten senses, the mind, the five sense objects, desire, hatred,happiness, distress, the aggregate, the life symptoms, and convictions--all these are considered, in summary, to be the field of activitiesand its interactions.
PURPORTFrom all the authoritative statements of the great sages, the Vedic
hymns and the aphorisms of the Vedanta-sutra, the components of thisworld are earth, water, fire, air and ether. These are the five greatelements (maha-bhuta). Then there are false ego, intelligence and theunmanifested stage of the three modes of nature. Then there are fivesenses for acquiring knowledge: the eyes, ears, nose, tongue and touch.Then five working senses: voice, legs, hands, anus and genitals. Then,above the senses, there is the mind, which is within and which can becalled the sense within. Therefore, including the mind, there areeleven senses altogether. Then there are the five objects of thesenses: smell, taste, form, touch and sound. Now the aggregate of thesetwenty-four elements is called the field of activity. If one makes ananalytical study of these twenty-four subjects, then he can very wellunderstand the field of activity. Then there is desire, hatred,pleasure and pain, which are interactions, representations of the fivegreat elements in the gross body. The living symptoms, represented byconsciousness and conviction, are the manifestation of the subtle body--the mind, ego and intelligence. These subtle elements are includedwithin the field of activities.The five great elements are a gross representation of the subtle falseego. They are a representation in the material conception.Consciousness is represented by intelligence, of which the unmanifestedstage is the three modes of material nature. The unmanifested threemodes of material nature is called pradhana.One who desires to know the twenty-four elements in detail along withtheir interactions should study the philosophy in more detail. InBhagavad-gita, a summary only is given.The body is the representation of all these factors, and there arechanges of the body, which are six in number: the body is born, itgrows, it stays, it produces by-products, then it begins to decay, andat the last stage it vanishes. Therefore the field is a nonpermanentmaterial thing. However, the ksetra-jna, the knower of the field, itsproprietor, is different.
TEXTS 8-12
amanitvam adambhitvam
ahimsa ksantir arjavamacaryopasanam saucamsthairyam atma-vinigrahah
indriyarthesu vairagyam
anahankara eva cajanma-mrtyu-jara-vyadhi-duhkha-dosanudarsanam
asaktir anabhisvangah
putra-dara-grhadisunityam ca sama-cittatvamistanistopapattisu
mayi cananya-yogena
bhaktir avyabhicarinivivikta-desa-sevitvamaratir jana-samsadi
adhyatma-jnana-nityatvam
tattva-jnanartha-darsanametaj jnanam iti proktamajnanam yad ato 'nyatha
SYNONYMSamanitvam--humility; adambhitvam--pridelessness; ahimsa--nonviolence;
ksantih--tolerance; arjavam--simplicity; acarya-upasanam--approaching abona fide spiritual master; saucam--cleanliness; sthairyam--steadfastness; atma-vinigrahah--control; indriya-arthesu--in the matterof the senses; vairagyam--renunciation; anahankarah--being withoutfalse egoism; eva--certainly; ca--also; janma--birth; mrtyu--death;jara--old age; vyadhi--disease; duhkha--distress; dosa--fault;anudarsanam--observing; asaktih--without attachment; anabhisvangah--without association; putra--sons; dara--wife; grha-adisu--home, etc.;nityam--eternal; ca--also; sama-cittatvam--equilibrium; ista--desirable; anista--undesirable; upapattisu--having obtained; mayi--untoMe; ca--also; ananya-yogena--by devotional service; bhaktih--devotion;avyabhicarini--constant, unalloyed; vivikta--solitary; desa--place;sevitvam--aspiring; aratih--without attachment; jana--to people ingeneral; samsadi--mass; adhyatma--pertaining to the self; jnana--knowledge; nityatvam--eternity; tattva-jnana--knowledge of the truth;artha--the object; darsanam--philosophy; etat--all this; jnanam--knowledge; iti--thus; proktam--declared; ajnanam--ignorance; yat--thatwhich; atah--from this; anyatha--others.
TRANSLATIONHumility, pridelessness, nonviolence, tolerance, simplicity,
approaching a bona fide spiritual master, cleanliness, steadiness andself-control; renunciation of the objects of sense gratification;absence of false ego, the perception of the evil of birth, death, oldage and disease; nonattachment to children, wife, home and the rest andeven-mindedness amid pleasant and unpleasant events; constant andunalloyed devotion to Me, resorting to solitary places, detachment fromthe general mass of people; accepting the importance of self-realization, and philosophical search for the Absolute Truth--all theseI thus declare to be knowledge and what is contrary to these isignorance.
PURPORTThis process of knowledge is sometimes misunderstood by less
intelligent men as being the interaction of the field of activity. Butactually this is the real process of knowledge. If one accepts thisprocess, then the possibility of approaching the Absolute Truth exists.This is not the interaction of the twenty-four elements, as describedbefore. This is actually the means to get out of it. Of all thedescriptions of the process of knowledge, the most important point isdescribed in the first line of the eleventh verse. Mayi cananya-yogenabhaktir avyabhicarini: the process of knowledge terminates in unalloyed
devotional service to the Lord. So, if one does not approach, or is not
able to approach, the transcendental service of the Lord, then theother nineteen items are of no particular value. But, if one takes todevotional service in full Krsna consciousness, the other nineteenitems automatically develop within him. The principle of accepting aspiritual master, as mentioned in the eighth verse, is essential. Evenfor one who takes to devotional service, it is most important.Transcendental life begins when one accepts a bona fide spiritualmaster. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, clearly stateshere that this process of knowledge is the actual path. Anythingspeculated beyond this is nonsense.As for the knowledge outlined here, the items may be analyzed asfollows: Humility means that one should not be anxious to have thesatisfaction of being honored by others. The material conception oflife makes us very eager to receive honor from others, but from thepoint of view of a man in perfect knowledge--who knows that he is notthis body--anything, honor or dishonor, pertaining to this body isuseless. One should not be hankering after this material deception.People are very anxious to be famous for their religion, andconsequently sometimes it is found that without understanding theprinciples of religion, one enters into some group, which is notactually following religious principles, and then wants to advertisehimself as a religious mentor. As for actual advancement in spiritualscience, one should have a test to see how far he is progressing. Hecan judge by these items.Nonviolence is generally taken to mean not killing or destroying thebody, but actually nonviolence means not to put others into distress.People in general are trapped by ignorance in the material concept oflife, and they perpetually suffer material pains. So, unless oneelevates people to spiritual knowledge, one is practicing violence. Oneshould try his best to distribute real knowledge to the people, so thatthey may become enlightened and leave this material entanglement. Thatis nonviolence.Tolerance means that one should be practiced to bear insult anddishonor from others. If one is engaged in the advancement of spiritualknowledge, there will be so many insults and so much dishonor fromothers. This is expected because material nature is so constituted.Even a boy like Prahlada, who, only five years old, was engaged in thecultivation of spiritual knowledge, was endangered when his fatherbecame antagonistic to his devotion. The father tried to kill him in somany ways, but Prahlada tolerated him. So, for making advancement inspiritual knowledge, there may be many impediments, but we should betolerant and continue our progress with determination.Simplicity means that without diplomacy one should be so straight-forward that he can disclose the real truth even to an enemy. As foracceptance of the spiritual master, that is essential, because withoutthe instruction of a bona fide spiritual master, one cannot progress inthe spiritual science. One should approach the spiritual master withall humility and offer him all services so that he will be pleased tobestow his blessings upon the disciple. Because a bona fide spiritualmaster is a representative of Krsna, if he bestows any blessings uponhis disciple, that will make the disciple immediately advanced withoutthe disciple's following the regulative principles. Or, the regulativeprinciples will be easier for one who has served the spiritual masterwithout reservation.Cleanliness is essential for making advancement in spiritual life.There are two kinds of cleanliness: external and internal. Externalcleanliness means taking a bath, but for internal cleanliness, one has
to think of Krsna always and chant Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna,
Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. This processcleans the accumulated dust of past karma from the mind.Steadiness means that one should be very determined to make progress inspiritual life. Without such determination, one cannot make tangibleprogress. And self-control means that one should not accept anythingwhich is detrimental to the path of spiritual progress. One shouldbecome accustomed to this and reject anything which is against the pathof spiritual progress. This is real renunciation. The senses are sostrong that they are always anxious to have sense gratification. Oneshould not cater to these demands, which are not necessary. The sensesshould only be gratified to keep the body fit so that one can dischargehis duty in advancing in spiritual life. The most important anduncontrollable sense is the tongue. If one can control the tongue, thenthere is every possibility of controlling the other senses. Thefunction of the tongue is to taste and to vibrate. Therefore, bysystematic regulation, the tongue should always be engaged in tastingthe remnants of foodstuffs offered to Krsna and chanting Hare Krsna. Asfar as the eyes are concerned, they should not be allowed to seeanything but the beautiful form of Krsna. That will control the eyes.Similarly, the ears should be engaged in hearing about Krsna and thenose in smelling the flowers offered to Krsna. This is the process ofdevotional service, and it is understood here that Bhagavad-gita issimply expounding the science of devotional service. Devotional serviceis the main and sole objective. Unintelligent commentators on theBhagavad-gita try to divert the mind of the reader to other subjects,but there is no other subject in Bhagavad-gita than devotional service.False ego means accepting this body as oneself. When one understandsthat he is not his body and is spirit soul, that is real ego. Ego isthere. False ego is condemned, but not real ego. In the Vedicliterature (Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 1.4.10) it is said, aham brahmasmi:I am Brahman, I am spirit. This "I am," the sense of self, also existsin the liberated stage of self-realization. This sense of "I am" isego, but when the sense of "I am" is applied to this false body it isfalse ego. When the sense of self is applied to reality, that is realego. There are some philosophers who say we should give up our ego, butwe cannot give up our ego, because ego means identity. We ought, ofcourse, to give up the false identification with the body.One should try to understand the distress of accepting birth, death,old age and disease. There are descriptions in various Vedicliteratures of birth. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam the world of the unborn,the child's stay in the womb of the mother, its suffering, etc., areall very graphically described. It should be thoroughly understood thatbirth is distressful. Because we forget how much distress we havesuffered within the womb of the mother, we do not make any solution tothe repetition of birth and death. Similarly at the time of death thereare all kinds of sufferings, and they are also mentioned in theauthoritative scriptures. These should be discussed. And as far asdisease and old age are concerned, everyone gets practical experience.No one wants to be diseased, and no one wants to become old, but thereis no avoiding these. Unless we have a pessimistic view of thismaterial life, considering the distresses of birth, death, old age anddisease, there is no impetus for our making advancement in spirituallife.As for detachment from children, wife and home, it is not meant thatone should have no feeling for these. They are natural objects ofaffection. But when they are not favorable to spiritual progress, thenone should not be attached to them. The best process for making the
home pleasant is Krsna consciousness. If one is in full Krsna
consciousness, he can make his home very happy, because this process ofKrsna consciousness is very easy. One need only chant Hare Krsna, HareKrsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, HareHare, accept the remnants of foodstuffs offered to Krsna, have somediscussion on books like Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam, andengage oneself in Deity worship. These four will make one happy. Oneshould train the members of his family in this way. The family memberscan sit down morning and evening and chant together Hare Krsna, HareKrsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, HareHare. If one can mold his family life in this way to develop Krsnaconsciousness, following these four principles, then there is no needto change from family life to renounced life. But if it is notcongenial, not favorable for spiritual advancement, then family lifeshould be abandoned. One must sacrifice everything to realize or serveKrsna, just as Arjuna did. Arjuna did not want to kill his familymembers, but when he understood that these family members wereimpediments to his Krsna realization, he accepted the instruction ofKrsna and fought and killed them. In all cases, one should be detachedfrom the happiness and distress of family life, because in this worldone can never be fully happy or fully miserable.Happiness and distress are concomitant factors of material life. Oneshould learn to tolerate, as advised in Bhagavad-gita. One can neverrestrict the coming and going of happiness and distress, so one shouldbe detached from the materialistic way of life and be automaticallyequipoised in both cases. Generally, when we get something desirable,we are very happy, and when we get something undesirable, we aredistressed. But if we are actually in the spiritual position, thesethings will not agitate us. To reach that stage, we have to practiceunbreakable devotional service; Devotional service to Krsna withoutdeviation means engaging oneself in the nine processes of devotionalservice, chanting, hearing, worshiping, offering respect, etc., asdescribed in the last verse of the Ninth Chapter. That process shouldbe followed.Naturally, when one is adapted to the spiritual way of life, he willnot want to mix with materialistic men. That would go against hisgrain. One may test himself by seeing how far he is inclined to live ina solitary place without unwanted association. Naturally a devotee hasno taste for unnecessary sporting or cinema-going or enjoying somesocial function, because he understands that these are simply a wasteof time. There are many research scholars and philosophers who studysex life or some other subject, but according to Bhagavad-gita, suchresearch work and philosophical speculation have no value. That is moreor less nonsensical. According to Bhagavad-gita, one should makeresearch, by philosophical discretion into the nature of the soul. Oneshould make research to understand with what the self is concerned.That is recommended here.As far as self-realization is concerned, it is clearly stated here thatbhakti-yoga is especially practical. As soon as there is a question ofdevotion, one must consider the relationship between the Supersoul andthe individual soul. The individual soul and the Supersoul cannot beone, at least not in the bhakti conception, the devotional conceptionof life. This service of the individual soul to the Supreme Soul iseternal, nityam, as it is clearly stated. So bhakti or devotionalservice is eternal. One should be established in that philosophicalconviction, otherwise it is only a waste of time, ignorance.In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.11) this is explained; vadanti tattattva-vidas tattvam yaj jnanam advayam. "Those who are actually
knowers of the Absolute Truth know that the Self is realized in three
different phases, as Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan." Bhagavan is thelast word in the realization of the Absolute Truth; therefore oneshould reach up to that platform of understanding the SupremePersonality of Godhead and thus engage in the devotional service of theLord. That is perfection of knowledge.Beginning from practicing humility up to the point of realization ofthe Supreme Truth, the Absolute Personality of Godhead, this process isjust like a staircase beginning from the ground floor up to the topfloor. Now on this staircase there are so many people who have reachedthe first floor, or the second or the third floor, etc., but unless onereaches the top floor, which is the understanding of Krsna, he is at alower stage of knowledge. If anyone wants to compete with God and atthe same time make advancement in spiritual knowledge, he will befrustrated. It is clearly stated that without humility understanding isharmful. To think oneself God is most puffed up. Although the livingentity is always being kicked by the stringent laws of material nature,still he thinks, "I am God" because of ignorance. One should be humbleand know that he is subordinate to the Supreme Lord. Due to rebellionagainst the Supreme Lord, one becomes subordinate to material nature.One must know and be convinced of this truth.
TEXT 13
jneyam yat tat pravaksyami
yaj jnatvamrtam asnuteanadi mat-param brahmana sat tan nasad ucyate
SYNONYMSjneyam--knowable; yat--that; tat--which; pravaksyami--I shall now
explain; yat--which; jnatva--knowing; amrtam--nectar; asnute--taste;anadi--beginningless; mat-param--subordinate to Me; brahma--spirit; na--neither; sat--cause; tat--that; na--nor; asat--effect; ucyate--iscalled.
TRANSLATIONI shall now explain the knowable, knowing which you will taste the
eternal. This is beginningless, and it is subordinate to Me. It iscalled Brahman, the spirit, and it lies beyond the cause and effect ofthis material world.
PURPORTThe Lord has explained the field of activities and the knower of the
field. He has also explained the process of knowing the knower of thefield of activities. Now He is explaining the knowable, both the souland the Supersoul respectively. By knowledge of the knower, both thesoul and the Supersoul, one can relish the nectar of life. As explainedin the Second Chapter, the living entity is eternal. This is alsoconfirmed here. There is no specific date at which the jiva was born.Nor can anyone trace out the history of the jivatma's manifestationfrom the Supreme Lord. Therefore it is beginningless. The Vedicliterature confirms this: na jayate mriyate va vipascit (Katha Upanisad1.2.18). The knower of the body is never born and never dies, and he isfull of knowledge.
The Supreme Lord is also stated in the Vedic literature (Svetasvatara
Upanisad 6.16) as pradhana-ksetrajna-patir gunesah. The Supreme Lord asthe Supersoul is the chief knower of the body and He is the master ofthe three modes of material nature. In the smrti it is said: dasa-bhutoharer eva nanyasvaiva kadacana. The living entities are eternally inthe service of the Supreme Lord. This is also confirmed by LordCaitanya in His teachings; therefore the description of Brahmanmentioned in this verse is in relation to the individual soul, and whenthe word Brahman is applied to the living entity, it is to beunderstood that he is vijnana-brahma as opposed to ananda-brahma.Ananda-brahma is the Supreme Brahman Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 14
sarvatah pani-padam tat
sarvato 'ksi-siro-mukhamsarvatah srutimal lokesarvam avrtya tisthati
SYNONYMSsarvatah--everywhere; pani--hands; padam--legs; tat--that; sarvatah--
everywhere; aksi--eyes; sirah--head; mukham--face; sarvatah--everywhere; sruti-mat--hearing; loke--in the world; sarvam--everything;avrtya--covering; tisthati--exists.
TRANSLATIONEverywhere are His hands and legs, His eyes and faces, and He hears
everything. In this way the Supersoul exists.
PURPORTAs the sun exists diffusing its unlimited rays, so does the Supersoul,
or Supreme Personality of Godhead. He exists in His all-pervading form,and in Him exist all the individual living entities, beginning from thefirst great teacher, Brahma, down to the small ants. There areunlimited heads, legs, hands and eyes, and unlimited living entities.All are existing in and on the Supersoul. Therefore the Supersoul isall-pervading. The individual soul, however, cannot say that he has hishands, legs and eyes everywhere. That is not possible. If he thinksthat although under ignorance he is not conscious that his hands andlegs are diffused all over, but when he attains to proper knowledge hewill come to that stage, his thinking is contradictory. This means thatthe individual soul, having become conditioned by material nature, isnot supreme. The Supreme is different from the individual soul. TheSupreme Lord can extend His hand without limit; the individual soulcannot. In Bhagavad-gita the Lord says that if anyone offers Him aflower, or a fruit, or a little water, He accepts. If the Lord is a fardistance away, how can He accept things? This is the omnipotence of theLord: even though He is situated in His own abode, far, far away fromearth, He can extend His hand to accept what anyone offers. That is Hispotency. In the Brahma-samhita (5.37) it is stated, goloka evanivasaty: although He is always engaged in pastimes in Histranscendental planet, He is all-pervading. The individual soul cannotclaim that he is all-pervading. Therefore this verse describes theSupreme Soul, the Personality of Godhead, not the individual soul.
TEXT 15
sarvendriya-gunabhasam
sarvendriya-vivarjitamasaktam sarva-bhrc caivanirgunam guna-bhoktr ca
SYNONYMSsarva--all; indriya--senses; guna--qualities; abhasam--original source;
sarva--all; indriya--senses; vivarjitam--being without; asaktam--without attachment; sarva-bhrt--maintainer of everyone; ca--also; eva--certainly; nirgunam--without material qualities; guna-bhoktr--simultaneously master of the gunas; ca--also.
TRANSLATIONThe Supersoul is the original source of all senses, yet He is without
senses. He is unattached, although He is the maintainer of all livingbeings. He transcends the modes of nature, and at the same time He isthe master of all modes of material nature.
PURPORTThe Supreme Lord, although the source of all the senses of the living
entities, doesn't have material senses like they have. Actually, theindividual souls have spiritual senses, but in conditioned life theyare covered with the material elements, and therefore the senseactivities are exhibited through matter. The Supreme Lord's senses arenot so covered. His senses are transcendental and are therefore callednirguna. Guna means the material modes, but His senses are withoutmaterial covering. It should be understood that His senses are notexactly like ours. Although He is the source of all our sensualactivities, He has His transcendental senses which are uncontaminated.This is very nicely explained in the Svetasvatara Upanisad (3.19) inthe verse apani-pado javano grahita. The Supreme Personality of Godheadhas no hands which are materially contaminated, but He has His handsand accepts whatever sacrifice is offered to Him. That is thedistinction between the conditioned soul and the Supersoul. He has nomaterial eyes, but He has eyes--otherwise how could He see? He seeseverything, past, present and future. He lives within the heart of theliving being, and He knows what we have done in the past, what we aredoing now, and what is awaiting us in the future. This is alsoconfirmed in Bhagavad-gita: He knows everything, but no one knows Him.It is said that the Supreme Lord has no legs like us, but He can travelthroughout space because He has spiritual legs. In other words, theLord is not impersonal; He has His eyes, legs, hands and everythingelse, and because we are part and parcel of the Supreme Lord we alsohave these things. But His hands, legs, eyes and senses are notcontaminated by material nature.Bhagavad-gita also confirms that when the Lord appears He appears as Heis by His internal potency. He is not contaminated by the materialenergy because He is the Lord of material energy. In the Vedicliterature we find that His whole embodiment is spiritual. He has Hiseternal form called sac-cid-ananda-vigraha. He is full of all opulence.He is the proprietor of all wealth and the owner of all energy. He isthe most intelligent and is full of knowledge. These are some of thesymptoms of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is maintainer of all
living entities and the witness of all activity. As far as we can
understand from Vedic literature, the Supreme Lord is alwaystranscendental. Although we do not see His head, face, hands, or legs,He has them, and when we are elevated to the transcendental situationthen we can see the Lord's form. Due to materially contaminated senses,we cannot see His form. Therefore the impersonalists who are stillmaterially affected cannot understand the Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 16
bahir antas ca bhutanam
acaram caram eva casuksmatvat tad avijneyamdura-stham cantike ca tat
SYNONYMSbahih--outside; antah--inside; ca--also; bhutanam--of all living
entities; acaram--not moving; caram--moving; eva--also; ca--and;suksmatvat--on account of being subtle; tat--that; avijneyam--unknowable; dura-stham--far away; ca--also; antike--near; ca--and; tat--that.
TRANSLATIONThe Supreme Truth exists both internally and externally, in the moving
and nonmoving. He is beyond the power of the material senses to see orto know. Although far, far away, He is also near to all.
PURPORTIn Vedic literature we understand that Narayana, the Supreme Person, is
residing both outside and inside of every living entity. He is presentin both the spiritual and material worlds. Although He is far, faraway, still He is near to us. These are the statements of Vedicliterature. Asino duram vrajati sayano yati sarvatah (Katha Upanisad1.2.21). And because He is always engaged in transcendental bliss, wecannot understand how He is enjoying His full opulence. We cannot seeor understand with these material senses. Therefore in the Vediclanguage it is said that to understand Him our material mind and sensescannot act. But one who has purified his mind and senses by practicingKrsna consciousness in devotional service can see Him constantly. It isconfirmed in Brahma-samhita that the devotee who has developed love forthe Supreme God can see Him always, without cessation. And it isconfirmed in Bhagavad-gita (11.54) that He can be seen and understoodonly by devotional service. Bhaktya tv ananyaya sakyah.
TEXT 17
avibhaktam ca bhutesu
vibhaktam iva ca sthitambhuta-bhartr ca taj jneyamgrasisnu prabhavisnu ca
SYNONYMSavibhaktam--without division; ca--also; bhutesu--in every living being;
vibhaktam--divided; iva--as if; ca--also; sthitam--situated; bhuta-
bhartr--maintainer of all living entities; ca--also; tat--that; jneyam-
-to be understood; grasisnu--devours; prabhavisnu--develops; ca--also.
TRANSLATIONAlthough the Supersoul appears to be divided, He is never divided. He
is situated as one. Although He is the maintainer of every livingentity, it is to be understood that He devours and develops all.
PURPORTThe Lord is situated in everyone's heart as the Supersoul. Does this
mean that He has become divided? No. Actually, He is one. The exampleis given of the sun: The sun, at the meridian, is situated in itsplace. But if one goes for five thousand miles in all directions andasks, "Where is the sun?" everyone will say that it is shining on hishead. In the Vedic literature this example is given to show thatalthough He is undivided, He is situated as if divided. Also it is saidin Vedic literature that one Visnu is present everywhere by Hisomnipotence, just as the sun appears in many places to many persons.And the Supreme Lord, although the maintainer of every living entity,devours everything at the time of annihilation. This was confirmed inthe Eleventh Chapter when the Lord said that He had come to devour allthe warriors assembled at Kuruksetra. He also mentioned that in theform of time He devours also. He is the annihilator, the killer of all.When there is creation, He develops all from their original state, andat the time of annihilation He devours them. The Vedic hymns confirmthe fact that He is the origin of all living entities and the rest ofall. After creation, everything rests in His omnipotence, and afterannihilation everything again returns to rest in Him. These are theconfirmations of Vedic hymns. Yato va imani bhutani jayante yena jatanijivanti yat prayanty abhisam-visanti tad brahma tad vijijnasasva(Taittiriya Upanisad 3.1).
TEXT 18
jyotisam api taj jyotis
tamasah param ucyatejnanam jneyam jnana-gamyamhrdi sarvasya visthitam
SYNONYMSjyotisam--in all luminous objects; api--also; tat--that; jyotih--source
of light; tamasah--of the darkness; param--beyond; ucyate--is said;jnanam--knowledge; jneyam--to be known; jnana-gamyam--to be approachedby knowledge; hrdi--in the heart; sarvasya--of everyone; visthitam--situated.
TRANSLATIONHe is the source of light in all luminous objects. He is beyond the
darkness of matter and is unmanifested. He is knowledge, He is theobject of knowledge, and He is the goal of knowledge. He is situated ineveryone's heart.
PURPORT
The Supersoul, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the source of
light in all luminous objects like the sun, moon and stars. In theVedic literature we find that in the spiritual kingdom there is no needof sun or moon because the effulgence of the Supreme Lord is there. Inthe material world that brahmajyoti, the Lord's spiritual effulgence,is covered by mahat-tattva, the material elements; therefore in thismaterial world we require the assistance of sun, moon, electricity,etc., for light. But in the spiritual world there is no need of suchthings. It is clearly stated in the Vedic literature that because ofHis luminous effulgence, everything is illuminated. It is clear,therefore, that His situation is not in the material world. He issituated in the spiritual world, which is far, far away in thespiritual sky. That is also confirmed in the Vedic literature. Aditya-varnam tamasah parastat (Svetasvatara Upanisad 3.8). He is just likethe sun, eternally luminous, but He is far, far beyond the darkness ofthis material world. His knowledge is transcendental. The Vedicliterature confirms that Brahman is concentrated transcendentalknowledge. To one who is anxious to be transferred to that spiritualworld, knowledge is given by the Supreme Lord who is situated ineveryone's heart.One Vedic mantra (Svetasvatara Upanisad 6.18) says, tam ha devam atma-buddhi-prakasam mumuksur vai saranam aham prapadye. One must surrenderunto the Supreme Personality of Godhead if he at all wants liberation.As far as the goal of ultimate knowledge is concerned, it is alsoconfirmed in Vedic literature: tam eva viditvati mrtyum eti. "Only byknowing Him can one surpass the boundary of birth and death."(Svetasvatara Upanisad 3.8) He is situated in everyone's heart as thesupreme controller. The Supreme has legs and hands distributedeverywhere, and this cannot be said of the individual soul. Thereforethat there are two knowers of the field of activity, the individualsoul and the Supersoul, must be admitted. One's hands and legs aredistributed locally, but Krsna's hands and legs are distributedeverywhere. This is confirmed in the Svetasvatara Upanisad (3.17):sarvasya prabhum isanam sarvasya saranam brhat. That SupremePersonality of Godhead, Supersoul, is the prabhu or master, of allliving entities; therefore He is the ultimate shelter of all livingentities. So there is no denying the fact that the Supreme Supersouland the individual soul are always different.
TEXT 19
iti ksetram tatha jnanam
jneyam coktam samasatahmad-bhakta etad vijnayamad-bhavayopapadyate
SYNONYMSiti--thus; ksetram--the field of activities (the body); tatha--also;
jnanam--knowledge; jneyam--the knowable; ca--also; uktam--described;samasatah--in summary; mat-bhaktah--My devotee; etat--all this;vijnaya--after understanding; mat-bhavaya--My nature; upapadyate--attains.
TRANSLATION
Thus the field of activities [the body], knowledge and the knowable
have been summarily described by Me. Only My devotees can understandthis thoroughly and thus attain to My nature.
PURPORTThe Lord has described in summary the body, knowledge and the knowable.
This knowledge is of three things: the knower, the knowable and theprocess of knowing. Combined, these are called vijnana, or the scienceof knowledge. Perfect knowledge can be understood by the unalloyeddevotees of the Lord directly. Others are unable to understand. Themonists say that at the ultimate stage these three items become one,but the devotees do not accept this. Knowledge and development ofknowledge mean understanding oneself in Krsna consciousness. We arebeing led by material consciousness, but as soon as we transfer allconsciousness to Krsna's activities and realize that Krsna iseverything, then we attain real knowledge. In other words, knowledge isnothing but the preliminary stage of understanding devotional serviceperfectly.
TEXT 20
prakrtim purusam caiva
viddhy anadi ubhav apivikarams ca gunams caivaviddhi prakrti-sambhavan
SYNONYMSprakrtim--material nature; purusam--living entities; ca--also; eva--
certainly; viddhi--must know; anadi--without beginning; ubhau--both;api--also; vikaran--transformations; ca--also; gunan--three modes ofnature; ca--also; eva--certainly; viddhi--know; prakrti--materialnature; sambhavan--produced of.
TRANSLATIONMaterial nature and the living entities should be understood to be
beginningless. Their transformations and the modes of matter areproducts of material nature.
PURPORTBy this knowledge, the body, the field of activities and the knowers of
the body (both the individual soul and the Supersoul) can be known. Thebody is the field of activity and is composed of material nature. It isthe individual soul which is embodied. Enjoying the activities of thebody is the purusa, or the living entity. He is one knower, and theother is the Supersoul. Of course, it is to be understood that both theSupersoul and the individual entity are different manifestations of theSupreme Personality of Godhead. The living entity is in the category ofHis energy, and the Supersoul is in the category of His personalexpansion.Both material nature and the living entity are eternal. That is to saythat they existed before the creation. The material manifestation isfrom the energy of the Supreme Lord and so also are the livingentities, but they are of the superior energy. Both the living entitiesand material nature existed before this cosmos was manifested. Material
nature was absorbed in the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Maha-Visnu,
and when it was required, it was manifested by the agency of mahat-tattva. Similarly, the living entities are also in Him, and becausethey are conditioned, they are averse to serving the Supreme Lord. Thusthey are not allowed to enter into the spiritual sky. After the windingup of material nature, these living entities are again given a chanceto act in the material world and prepare themselves to enter into thespiritual world. That is the mystery of this material creation.Actually the living entity is originally the spiritual part and parcelof the Supreme Lord, but due to his rebellious nature, he isconditioned within material nature. It really does not matter how theseliving entities or superior entities of the Supreme Lord have come incontact with material nature. The Supreme Personality of Godhead knows,however, how and why this actually took place. In the scriptures theLord says that those attracted by this material nature are undergoing ahard struggle for existence. But we should know it with certainty fromthe descriptions of these few verses that all the transformations andinfluences of material nature by the three modes are also productionsof material nature. All transformations and variety in respect toliving entities are due to the body. As far as spirit is concerned,living entities are all the same.
TEXT 21
karya-karana-kartrtve
hetuh prakrtir ucyatepurusah sukha-duhkhanambhoktrtve hetur ucyate
SYNONYMSkarya--effect; karana--cause; kartrtve--in the matter of creation;
hetuh--instrument; prakrtih--material nature; ucyate--is said to be;purusah--the living entity; sukha--of happiness; duhkhanam--anddistress; bhoktrtve--in enjoyment; hetuh--the instrument; ucyate--issaid to be.
TRANSLATIONNature is said to be the cause of all material activities and effects,
whereas the living entity is the cause of the various sufferings andenjoyments in this world.
PURPORTThe different manifestations of body and senses among the living
entities are due to material nature. There are 8,400,000 differentspecies of life, and these varieties are the creation of the materialnature. They arise from the different sensual pleasures of the livingentity, who thus desires to live in this body or that. When he is putinto different bodies, he enjoys different kinds of happiness anddistress. His material happiness and distress are due to his body, andnot to himself as he is. In his original state there is no doubt ofenjoyment; therefore that is his real state. Because of the desire tolord it over material nature, he is in the material world. In thespiritual world there is no such thing. The spiritual world is pure,but in the material world everyone is struggling hard to acquirevictims who present different pleasures to the body. It might be more
clear to state that this body is the effect of the senses. The senses
are instruments for gratifying desire. Now, the sum total--body andinstrument senses--are offered by material nature and, as will be clearin the next verse, the living entity is blessed or damned withcircumstances according to his past desire and activity. According toone's desires and activities, material nature places one in variousresidential quarters. The being himself is the cause of his attainingsuch residential quarters and his attendant enjoyment or suffering.Once placed in some particular kind of body, he comes under the controlof nature because the body, being matter, acts according to the laws ofnature. At that time, the living entity has no power to change thatlaw. Suppose an entity is put into the body of a dog. As soon as he isput into the body of a dog, he must act like a dog. He cannot actotherwise. And if the living entity is put into the body of a hog, thenhe is forced to eat stool and act like a hog. Similarly, if the livingentity is put into the body of a demigod, he must act according to hisbody. This is the law of nature. But in all circumstances, theSupersoul is with the individual soul. That is explained in the Vedas(Mundaka Upanisad 3.1.1) as follows: dva suparna sayuja sakhayah. TheSupreme Lord is so kind upon the living entity that He alwaysaccompanies the individual soul and in all circumstances is present asthe Supersoul, or Paramatma.
TEXT 22
purusah prakrti-stho hi
bhunkte prakrti-jan gunankaranam guna-sango 'syasad-asad-yoni-janmasu
SYNONYMSpurusah--the living entity; prakrti-sthah--being situated in the
material energy; hi--certainly; bhunkte--enjoys; prakrti-jan--producedby the material nature; gunan--modes of nature; karanam--cause; guna-sangah--association with the modes of nature; asya--of the livingentity; sat-asat--good and bad; yoni--species of life; janmasu--birth.
TRANSLATIONThe living entity in material nature thus follows the ways of life,
enjoying the three modes of nature. This is due to his association withthat material nature. Thus he meets with good and evil amongst variousspecies.
PURPORTThis verse is very important for an understanding of how the living
entities transmigrate from one body to another. It is explained in theSecond Chapter that the living entity is transmigrating from one bodyto another just as one changes dress. This change of dress is due tohis attachment to material existence. As long as he is captivated bythis false manifestation, he has to continue transmigrating from onebody to another. Due to his desire to lord it over material nature, heis put into such undesirable circumstances. Under the influence ofmaterial desire, the entity is born sometimes as a demigod, sometimesas a man, sometimes as a beast, as a bird, as a worm, as an aquatic, asa saintly man, as a bug. This is going on. And in all cases the living
entity thinks himself to be the master of his circumstances, yet he is
under the influence of material nature.How he is put into such different bodies is explained here. It is dueto association with the different modes of nature. One has to rise,therefore, above the three material modes and become situated in thetranscendental position. That is called Krsna consciousness. Unless oneis situated in Krsna consciousness, his material consciousness willoblige him to transfer from one body to another because he has materialdesires since time immemorial. But he has to change that conception.That change can be effected only by hearing from authoritative sources.The best example is here: Arjuna is hearing the science of God fromKrsna. The living entity, if he submits to this hearing process, willlose his long-cherished desire to dominate material nature, andgradually and proportionately, as he reduces his long desire todominate, he comes to enjoy spiritual happiness. In a Vedic mantra itis said that as he becomes learned in association with the SupremePersonality of Godhead, he proportionately relishes his eternalblissful life.
TEXT 23
upadrastanumanta ca
bharta bhokta mahesvarahparamatmeti capy uktodehe 'smin purusah parah
SYNONYMSupadrasta--overseer; anumanta--permitter; ca--also; bharta--master;
bhokta--supreme enjoyer; maha-isvarah--the Supreme Lord; parama-atma--Supersoul; iti--also; ca--and; api uktah--is said; dehe--in this body;asmin--this; purusah--enjoyer; parah--transcendental.
TRANSLATIONYet in this body there is another, a transcendental enjoyer who is the
Lord, the supreme proprietor, who exists as the overseer and permitter,and who is known as the Supersoul.
PURPORTIt is stated here that the Supersoul, who is always with the individual
soul, is the representation of the Supreme Lord. He is not an ordinaryliving entity. Because the monist philosophers take the knower of thebody to be one, they think that there is no difference between theSupersoul and the individual soul. To clarify this, the Lord says thatHe is the representation of Paramatma in every body. He is differentfrom the individual soul; He is para, transcendental. The individualsoul enjoys the activities of a particular field, but the Supersoul ispresent not as finite enjoyer nor as one taking part in bodilyactivities, but as the witness, overseer, permitter and supremeenjoyer. His name is Paramatma, not atma, and He is transcendental. Itis distinctly clear that the atma and Paramatma are different. TheSupersoul, the Paramatma, has legs and hands everywhere, but theindividual soul does not. And because He is the Supreme Lord, He ispresent within to sanction the individual soul's desiring materialenjoyment. Without the sanction of the Supreme Soul, the individualsoul cannot do anything. The individual is bhukta, or the sustained,
and the Lord is bhokta, or the maintainer. There are innumerable living
entities, and He is staying in them as a friend.The fact is that individual living entities are eternally part andparcel of the Supreme Lord, and both of them are very intimatelyrelated as friends. But the living entity has the tendency to rejectthe sanction of the Supreme Lord and act independently in an attempt todominate nature, and because he has this tendency, he is called themarginal energy of the Supreme Lord. The living entity can be situatedeither in the material energy or the spiritual energy. As long as he isconditioned by the material energy, the Supreme Lord, as his friend,the Supersoul, stays with him just to get him to return to thespiritual energy. The Lord is always eager to take him back to thespiritual energy, but due to his minute independence, the individualentity is continually rejecting the association of spiritual light.This misuse of independence is the cause of his material strife in theconditioned nature. The Lord, therefore, is always giving instructionfrom within and from without. From without He gives instructions asstated in Bhagavad-gita, and from within He tries to convince him thathis activities in the material field are not conducive to realhappiness. "Just give it up and turn your face toward Me. Then you willbe happy," He says. Thus the intelligent person who places his faith inthe Paramatma or the Supreme Personality of Godhead begins to advancetoward a blissful eternal life of knowledge.
TEXT 24
ya evam vetti purusam
prakrtim ca gunaih sahasarvatha vartamano 'pina sa bhuyo 'bhijayate
SYNONYMSyah--anyone; evam--thus; vetti--understands; purusam--the living
entity; prakrtim--material nature; ca--and; gunaih--modes of materialnature; saha--with; sarvatha--by all means; vartamanah--situated; api--in spite of; na--never; sah--he; bhuyah--again; abhijayate--takes hisbirth.
TRANSLATIONOne who understands this philosophy concerning material nature, the
living entity and the interaction of the modes of nature is sure toattain liberation. He will not take birth here again, regardless of hispresent position.
PURPORTClear understanding of material nature, the Supersoul, the individual
soul and their interrelation makes one eligible to become liberated andturn to the spiritual atmosphere without being forced to return to thismaterial nature. This is the result of knowledge. The purpose ofknowledge is to understand distinctly that the living entity has bychance fallen into this material existence. By his personal endeavor inassociation with authorities, saintly persons and a spiritual master,he has to understand his position and then revert to spiritualconsciousness or Krsna consciousness by understanding Bhagavad-gita asit is explained by the Personality of Godhead. Then it is certain that
he will never come again into this material existence; he will be
transferred into the spiritual world for a blissful eternal life ofknowledge.
TEXT 25
dhyanenatmani pasyanti
kecid atmanam atmanaanye sankhyena yogenakarma-yogena capare
SYNONYMSdhyanena--by meditation; atmani--self; pasyanti--see; kecit--one;
atmanam--Supersoul; atmana--by the mind; anye--others; sankhyena--byphilosophical discussion; yogena--by the yoga system; karma-yogena--byactivities without fruitive desire; ca--also; apare--others.
TRANSLATIONThat Supersoul is perceived by some through meditation, by some through
the cultivation of knowledge, and by others through working withoutfruitive desire.
PURPORTThe Lord informs Arjuna that the conditioned souls can be divided into
two classes as far as man's search for self-realization is concerned.Those who are atheists, agnostics and skeptics are beyond the sense ofspiritual understanding. But there are others who are faithful in theirunderstanding of spiritual life, and they are called workers who haverenounced fruitive results. Those who always try to establish thedoctrine of monism are also counted amongst the atheists and agnostics.In other words, only the devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godheadare really capable of spiritual understanding because they understandthat beyond this material nature there is the spiritual world and theSupreme Personality of Godhead who is expanded as the Paramatma, theSupersoul in everyone, the all-pervading Godhead. Of course there arethose who try to understand the Supreme Absolute Truth by cultivationof knowledge, and they can be counted in the second class. Theatheistic philosophers analyze this material world into twenty-fourelements, and they place the individual soul as the twenty-fifth item.When they are able to understand the nature of the individual soul tobe transcendental to the material elements, they are able to understandalso that above the individual soul there is the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. He is the twenty-sixth element. Thus gradually they also cometo the standard of devotional service in Krsna consciousness. Those whowork without fruitive results are also perfect in their attitude. Theyare given a chance to advance to the platform of devotional service inKrsna consciousness. Here it is stated that there are some people whoare pure in consciousness and who try to find out the Supersoul bymeditation, and when they discover the Supersoul within themselves,they become transcendentally situated. Similarly, there are others whoalso try to understand the Supreme Soul by cultivation of knowledge,and there are others who cultivate the hatha-yoga system and who try tosatisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead by childish activities.
TEXT 26
anye tv evam ajanantah
srutvanyebhya upasatete 'pi catitaranty evamrtyum sruti-parayanah
SYNONYMSanye--others; tu--but; evam--thus; ajanantah--without spiritual
knowledge; srutva--by hearing; anyebhyah--from others; upasate--beginto worship; te--they; api--also; ca--and; atitaranti--transcend; eva--certainly; mrtyum--the path of death; sruti-parayanah--inclined to theprocess of hearing.
TRANSLATIONAgain there are those who, although not conversant in spiritual
knowledge, begin to worship the Supreme Person upon hearing about Himfrom others. Because of their tendency to hear from authorities, theyalso transcend the path of birth and death.
PURPORTThis verse is particularly applicable to modern society because in
modern society there is practically no education in spiritual matters.Some of the people may appear to be atheistic or agnostic orphilosophical, but actually there is no knowledge of philosophy. As forthe common man, if he is a good soul, then there is a chance foradvancement by hearing. This hearing process is very important. LordCaitanya, who preached Krsna consciousness in the modern world, gavegreat stress to hearing because if the common man simply hears fromauthoritative sources, he can progress, especially, according to LordCaitanya, if he hears the transcendental vibration Hare Krsna, HareKrsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, HareHare. It is stated, therefore, that all men should take advantage ofhearing from realized souls and gradually become able to understandeverything. The worship of the Supreme Lord will then undoubtedly takeplace. Lord Caitanya has said that in this age no one needs to changehis position, but one should give up the endeavor to understand theAbsolute Truth by speculative reasoning. One should learn to become theservant of those who are in knowledge of the Supreme Lord. If one isfortunate enough to take shelter of a pure devotee, hear from him aboutself-realization and follow in his footsteps, he will be graduallyelevated to the position of a pure devotee. In this verse particularly,the process of hearing is strongly recommended, and this is veryappropriate. Although the common man is often not as capable as so-called philosophers, faithful hearing from an authoritative person willhelp one transcend this material existence and go back to Godhead, backto home.
TEXT 27
yavat sanjayate kincit
sattvam sthavara-jangamamksetra-ksetrajna-samyogattad viddhi bharatarsabha
SYNONYMS
yavat--whatever; sanjayate--takes place; kincit--anything; sattvam--
existence; sthavara--not moving; jangamam--moving; ksetra--the body;ksetra-jna--knower of the body; samyogat--union between; tat viddhi--you must know it; bharata-rsabha--O chief of the Bharatas.
TRANSLATIONO chief of the Bharatas, whatever you see in existence, both moving and
unmoving, is only the combination of the field of activities and theknower of the field.
PURPORTBoth material nature and the living entity, which were existing before
the creation of the cosmos, are explained in this verse. Whatever iscreated is but a combination of the living entity and material nature.There are many manifestations like trees, mountains and hills, whichare not moving, and there are many existences which are moving, and allof them are but combinations of material nature and superior nature,the living entity. Without the touch of superior nature, the livingentity, nothing can grow. Therefore the relationship between matter andnature is eternally going on, and this combination is effected by theSupreme Lord; therefore He is the controller of both the superior andinferior natures. The material nature is created by Him, and thesuperior nature is placed in this material nature, and thus all theseactivities and manifestations take place.
TEXT 28
samam sarvesu bhutesu
tisthantam paramesvaramvinasyatsv avinasyantamyah pasyati sa pasyati
SYNONYMSsamam--equally; sarvesu--in all; bhutesu--living entities; tisthan-tam-
-residing; parama-isvaram--the Supersoul; vinasyatsu--in thedestructible; avinasyantam--not destroyed; yah--anyone; pasyati--sees;sah--he; pasyati--actually sees.
TRANSLATIONOne who sees the Supersoul accompanying the individual soul in all
bodies, and who understands that neither the soul nor the Supersoul isever destroyed, actually sees.
PURPORTAnyone who can see three things--the body, the proprietor of the body,
or individual soul, and the friend of the individual soul, combinedtogether by good association--is actually in knowledge. Those who arenot associated with the soul's friend are ignorant; they simply see thebody, and when the body is destroyed they think that everything isfinished, but actually it is not so. After the destruction of the body,both the soul and the Supersoul exist, and they go on eternally in manyvarious moving and unmoving forms. The Sanskrit word paramesvara is
sometimes translated as "the individual soul" because the soul is the
master of the body, and after the destruction of the body he transfersto another form. In that way he is master. But there are others whointerpret this paramesvara to be the Supersoul. In either case, boththe Supersoul and the individual soul continue. They are not destroyed.One who can see in this way can actually see what is happening.
TEXT 29
samam pasyan hi sarvatra
samavasthitam isvaramna hinasty atmanatmanamtato yati param gatim
SYNONYMSsamam--equally; pasyan--seeing; hi--certainly; sarvatra--everywhere;
samavasthitam--equally situated; isvaram--Supersoul; na--does not;hinasti--degrade; atmana--by the mind; atmanam--the soul; tatah yati--then reaches; param--the transcendental; gatim--destination.
TRANSLATIONOne who sees the Supersoul in every living being and equal everywhere
does not degrade himself by his mind. Thus he approaches thetranscendental destination.
PURPORTThe living entity, by accepting his material existence as just so much
suffering, can become situated in his spiritual existence. If oneunderstands that the Supreme is situated in His Paramatma manifestationeverywhere, that is, if one can see the presence of the SupremePersonality of Godhead in every living thing, he does not degradehimself, and he therefore gradually advances to the spiritual world.The mind is generally addicted to self-centered processes; but when themind turns to the Supersoul, one becomes advanced in spiritualunderstanding.
TEXT 30
prakrtyaiva ca karmani
kriyamanani sarvasahyah pasyati tathatmanamakartaram sa pasyati
SYNONYMSprakrtya--by material nature; eva--certainly; ca--also; karmani--
activities; kriyamanani--engaged in performing; sarvasah--in allrespects; yah--anyone who; pasyati--sees; tatha--also; atmanam--himself; akartaram--non-doer; sah--he; pasyati--sees perfectly.
TRANSLATIONOne who can see that all activities are performed by the body, which is
created of material nature, and sees that the self does nothing,actually sees.
PURPORT
This body is made by material nature under the direction of the
Supersoul, and whatever activities are going on in respect to one'sbody are not his doing. Whatever one is supposed to do, either forhappiness or for distress, one is forced to do because of the bodilyconstitution. The self, however, is outside all these bodilyactivities. This body is given according to one's past desires. Tofulfill desires, one is given the body, with which he acts accordingly.Practically speaking, the body is a machine, designed by the SupremeLord, to fulfill desires. Because of desires, one is put into difficultcircumstances to suffer or to enjoy. This transcendental vision of theliving entity, when developed, makes one separate from bodilyactivities. One who has such a vision is an actual seer.
TEXT 31
yada bhuta-prthag-bhavam
eka-stham anupasyatitata eva ca vistarambrahma sampadyate tada
SYNONYMSyada--when; bhuta--living entities; prthak-bhavam--separated
identities; eka-stham--situated in one; anupasyati--tries to seethrough authority; tatah eva--thereafter; ca--also; vistaram--expanded;brahma--the Absolute; sampadyate--attains; tada--at that time.
TRANSLATIONWhen a sensible man ceases to see different identities, which are due
to different material bodies, he attains to the Brahman conception.Thus he sees that beings are expanded everywhere.
PURPORTWhen one can see that the various bodies of living entities arise due
to the different desires of the individual soul and do not actuallybelong to the soul itself, one actually sees. In the materialconception of life, we find someone a demigod, someone a human being, adog, a cat, etc. This is material vision, not actual vision. Thismaterial differentiation is due to a material conception of life. Afterthe destruction of the material body, the spirit soul is one. Thespirit soul, due to contact with material nature, gets different typesof bodies. When one can see this, he attains spiritual vision; thusbeing freed from differentiations like man, animal, big, low, etc., onebecomes purified in his consciousness and able to develop Krsnaconsciousness in his spiritual identity. How he then sees things willbe explained in the next verse.
TEXT 32
anaditvan nirgunatvat
paramatmayam avyayahsarira-stho 'pi kaunteyana karoti na lipyate
SYNONYMS
anaditvat--due to eternity; nirgunatvat--due to transcendental; parama-
-beyond material nature; atma--spirit; ayam--this; avyayah--inexhaustible; sarira-sthah api--though dwelling in the body; kaunteya--O son of Kunti; na karoti--never does anything; na lipyate--nor is heentangled.
TRANSLATIONThose with the vision of eternity can see that the soul is
transcendental, eternal, and beyond the modes of nature. Despitecontact with the material body, O Arjuna, the soul neither doesanything nor is entangled.
PURPORTA living entity appears to be born because of the birth of the material
body, but actually the living entity is eternal; he is not born, and inspite of his being situated in a material body, he is transcendentaland eternal. Thus he cannot be destroyed. By nature he is full ofbliss. He does not engage himself in any material activities; thereforethe activities performed due to his contact with material bodies do notentangle him.
TEXT 33
yatha sarva-gatam sauksmyad
akasam nopalipyatesarvatravasthito dehetathatma nopalipyate
SYNONYMSyatha--as; sarva-gatam--all-pervading; sauksmyat--due to being subtle;
akasam--the sky; na--never; upalipyate--mixes; sarvatra--everywhere;avasthitah--situated; dehe--in the body; tatha--such; atma--the self;na--never; upalipyate--mixes.
TRANSLATIONThe sky, due to its subtle nature, does not mix with anything, although
it is all-pervading. Similarly, the soul, situated in Brahman vision,does not mix with the body, though situated in that body.
PURPORTThe air enters into water, mud, stool and whatever else is there; still
it does not mix with anything. Similarly, the living entity, eventhough situated in varieties of bodies, is aloof from them due to hissubtle nature. Therefore it is impossible to see with the material eyeshow the living entity is in contact with this body and how he is out ofit after the destruction of the body. No one in science can ascertainthis.
TEXT 34
yatha prakasayaty ekah
krtsnam lokam imam ravihksetram ksetri tatha krtsnamprakasayati bharata
SYNONYMSyatha--as; prakasayati--illuminates; ekah--one; krtsnam--the whole;
lokam--universe; imam--this; ravih--the sun; ksetram--this body;ksetri--the soul; tatha--similarly; krtsnam--all; prakasayati--illuminates; bharata--O son of Bharata.
TRANSLATIONO son of Bharata, as the sun alone illuminates all this universe, so
does the living entity, one within the body, illuminate the entire bodyby consciousness.
PURPORTThere are various theories regarding consciousness. Here in Bhagavad-
gita the example of the sun and the sunshine is given. As the sun issituated in one place, but is illuminating the whole universe, so asmall particle of spirit soul, although situated in the heart of thisbody, is illuminating the whole body by consciousness. Thusconsciousness is the proof of the presence of the soul, as sunshine orlight is the proof of the presence of the sun. When the soul is presentin the body, there is consciousness all over the body, and as soon asthe soul has passed from the body, there is no more consciousness. Thiscan be easily understood by any intelligent man. Thereforeconsciousness is not a production of the combinations of matter. It isthe symptom of the living entity. The consciousness of the livingentity, although qualitatively one with the supreme consciousness, isnot supreme because the consciousness of one particular body does notshare that of another body. But the Supersoul, which is situated in allbodies as the friend of the individual soul, is conscious of allbodies. That is the difference between supreme consciousness andindividual consciousness.
TEXT 35
ksetra-ksetrajnayor evam
antaram jnana-caksusabhuta-prakrti-moksam caye vidur yanti te param
SYNONYMSksetra--body; ksetra-jnayoh--of the proprietor of the body; evam--that;
antaram--difference; jnana-caksusa--by vision of knowledge; bhuta--living entity; prakrti--material nature; moksam--liberation; ca--also;ye--one who; viduh--knows; yanti--approaches; te--they; param--Supreme.
TRANSLATIONOne who knowingly sees this difference between the body and the owner
of the body and can understand the process of liberation from thisbondage, also attains to the supreme goal.
