PURPORT
The purport of this Thirteenth Chapter is that one should know the
distinction between the body, the owner of the body, and the Supersoul.A faithful person should at first have some good association to hear ofGod and thus gradually become enlightened. If one accepts a spiritualmaster, he can learn to distinguish between matter and spirit, and thatbecomes the steppingstone for further spiritual realization. Aspiritual master teaches his students to get free from the materialconcept of life by various instructions. For instance, in Bhagavad-gitawe find Krsna instructing Arjuna to free him from materialisticconsiderations.One can understand that this body is matter; it can be analyzed withits twenty-four elements. That is the gross manifestation. And thesubtle manifestation is the mind and psychological effects. And thesymptoms of life are the interaction of these features. But over andabove this, there is the soul, and there is also the Supersoul. Thesoul and the Supersoul are two. This material world is working by theconjunction of the soul and the twenty-four material elements. One whocan see the constitution of the whole material manifestation as thiscombination of the soul and material elements and also can see thesituation of the Supreme Soul becomes eligible for transfer to thespiritual world. These things are meant for contemplation and forrealization, and one should have a complete understanding of thischapter with the help of the spiritual master.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Thirteenth Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Nature, the Enjoyer andConsciousness.
Chapter 14
The Three Modes Of Material Nature
TEXT 1
sri-bhagavan uvaca
param bhuyah pravaksyamijnananam jnanam uttamamyaj jnatva munayah sarveparam siddhim ito gatah
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; param--
transcendental; bhuyah--again; pravaksyami--I shall speak; jnananam--ofall knowledge; jnanam--knowledge; uttamam--the supreme; yat--which;jnatva--knowing; munayah--the sages; sarve--all; param--transcendental;siddhim--perfection; itah--from this world; gatah--attained.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: Again I shall declare to you this supreme
wisdom, the best of all knowledge, knowing which all the sages haveattained the supreme perfection.
PURPORT
From the Seventh Chapter to the end of the Twelfth Chapter, Sri Krsna
in detail reveals the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. Now, the Lord Himself is further enlightening Arjuna. If oneunderstands this chapter through the process of philosophicalspeculation, he will come to an understanding of devotional service. Inthe Thirteenth Chapter, it was clearly explained that by humblydeveloping knowledge one may possibly be freed from materialentanglement. It has also been explained that it is due to associationwith the modes of nature that the living entity is entangled in thismaterial world. Now, in this chapter, the Supreme Personality explainswhat those modes of nature are, how they act, how they bind and howthey give liberation. The knowledge explained in this chapter isproclaimed by the Supreme Lord to be superior to the knowledge given sofar in other chapters. By understanding this knowledge, various greatsages attained perfection and transferred to the spiritual world. TheLord now explains the same knowledge in a better way. This knowledge isfar, far superior to all other processes of knowledge thus farexplained, and knowing this many attained perfection. Thus it isexpected that one who understands this Fourteenth Chapter will attainperfection.
TEXT 2
idam jnanam upasritya
mama sadharmyam agatahsarge 'pi nopajayantepralaye na vyathanti ca
SYNONYMSidam--this; jnanam--knowledge; upasritya--taking shelter of; mama--My;
sadharmyam--nature; agatah--attained; sarge api--even in the creation;na--never; upajayante--comes in; pralaye--in the annihilation; na--nor;vyathanti--disturbed; ca--also.
TRANSLATIONBy becoming fixed in this knowledge, one can attain to the
transcendental nature, which is like My own nature. Thus established,one is not born at the time of creation nor disturbed at the time ofdissolution.
PURPORTAfter acquiring perfect transcendental knowledge, one acquires
qualitative equality with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, becomingfree from the repetition of birth and death. One does not, however,lose his identity as an individual soul. It is understood from Vedicliterature that the liberated souls who have reached the transcendentalplanets of the spiritual sky always look to the lotus feet of theSupreme Lord, being engaged in His transcendental loving service. So,even after liberation, the devotees do not lose their individualidentities.Generally, in the material world, whatever knowledge we get iscontaminated by the three modes of material nature. But knowledge whichis not contaminated by the three modes of nature is calledtranscendental knowledge. As soon as one is situated in thattranscendental knowledge, he is on the same platform as that of the
Supreme Person. Those who have no knowledge of the spiritual sky hold
that after being freed from the material activities of the materialform, this spiritual identity becomes formless, without anyvariegatedness. However, just as there is material variegatedness inthis world, so, in the spiritual world, there is also variegatedness.Those in ignorance of this think that spiritual existence is opposed tomaterial variety. But actually, in the spiritual sky, one attainsspiritual form. There are spiritual activities, and the spiritualsituation is called devotional life. That atmosphere is said to beuncontaminated and there one is equal in quality with the Supreme Lord.To obtain such knowledge, one must develop all the spiritual qualities.One who thus develops the spiritual qualities is not affected either bythe creation or the destruction of the material world.
TEXT 3
mama yonir mahad brahma
tasmin garbham dadhamy ahamsambhavah sarva-bhutanamtato bhavati bharata
SYNONYMSmama--My; yonih--source of birth; mahat--the total material existence;
brahma--supreme; tasmin--in that; garbham--pregnancy; dadhami--create;aham--I; sambhavah--possibility; sarva-bhutanam--of all livingentities; tatah--thereafter; bhavati--becomes; bharata--O son ofBharata.
TRANSLATIONThe total material substance, called Brahman, is the source of birth,
and it is that Brahman that I impregnate, making possible the births ofall living beings, O son of Bharata.
PURPORTThis is an explanation of the world: everything that takes place is due
to the combination of ksetra and ksetra-jna, the body and the spiritsoul. This combination of material nature and the living entity is madepossible by the Supreme God Himself. The mahat-tattva is the totalcause of the total cosmic manifestation, and because in the totalsubstance of the material cause there are three modes of nature, it issometimes called Brahman. The Supreme Personality impregnates thattotal substance, and thus innumerable universes become possible. Thistotal material substance, the mahat-tattva, is described as Brahman inthe Vedic literature (Mundaka Upanisad 1.1.19): tasmad etad brahmanama-rupam annam ca jayate. Into that Brahman the seeds of the livingentities are impregnated by the Supreme Person. The twenty-fourelements, beginning from earth, water, fire and air, are all materialenergy, called mahad brahma, or the great Brahman, the material nature.As is explained in the Seventh Chapter, beyond this there is another,superior nature--the living entity. In material nature the superiornature is mixed by the will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, andthereafter all living entities are born of this material nature.The scorpion lays its eggs in piles of rice, and sometimes it is saidthat the scorpion is born out of rice. But the rice is not the cause ofthe scorpion. Actually, the eggs were laid by the mother. Similarly,
material nature is not the cause of the birth of the living entities.
The seed is given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and they onlyseem to come out as products of material nature. Thus every livingentity, according to his past activities, has a different body, createdby this material nature, and the entity can enjoy or suffer accordingto his past deeds. The Lord is the cause of all the manifestations ofliving entities in this material world.
TEXT 4
sarva-yonisu kaunteya
murtayah sambhavanti yahtasam brahma mahad yoniraham bija-pradah pita
SYNONYMSsarva-yonisu--in all species of life; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
murtayah--forms; sambhavanti--as they appear; yah--which; tasam--all ofthem; brahma--supreme; mahat yonih--the source of birth in the materialsubstance; aham--Myself; bija-pradah--seed-giving; pita--father.
TRANSLATIONIt should be understood that all species of life, O son of Kunti, are
made possible by birth in this material nature, and that I am the seed-giving father.
PURPORTIn this verse it is clearly explained that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Krsna, is the original father of all living entities. Theliving entities are combinations of the material nature and thespiritual nature. Such living entities are seen not only on thisplanet, but in every planet, even in the highest, where Brahma issituated. Everywhere there are living entities; within the earth thereare living entities, even within water and within fire. All theseappearances are due to the mother, material nature, and Krsna's seed-giving process. The purport is that the living entities, beingimpregnated in the material world, come out in various forms at thetime of creation according to their past deeds.
TEXT 5
sattvam rajas tama iti
gunah prakrti-sambhavahnibadhnanti maha-bahodehe dehinam avyayam
SYNONYMSsattvam--mode of goodness; rajah--mode of passion; tamah--mode of
ignorance; iti--thus; gunah--qualities; prakrti--material nature;sambhavah--produced of; nibadhnanti--does condition; maha-baho--Omighty-armed one; dehe--in this body; dehinam--the living entity;avyayam--eternal.
TRANSLATION
Material nature consists of the three modes--goodness, passion and
ignorance. When the living entity comes in contact with nature, hebecomes conditioned by these modes.
PURPORTThe living entity, because he is transcendental, has nothing to do with
this material nature. Still, because he has become conditioned by thematerial world, he is acting under the spell of the three modes ofmaterial nature. Because living entities have different kinds ofbodies, in terms of the different aspects of nature, they are inducedto act according to that nature. This is the cause of the varieties ofhappiness and distress.
TEXT 6
tatra sattvam nirmalatvat
prakasakam anamayamsukha-sangena badhnatijnana-sangena canagha
SYNONYMStatra--thereafter; sattvam--mode of goodness; nirmalatvat--being purest
in the material world; prakasakam--illuminating; anamayam--without anysinful reaction; sukha--happiness; sangena--association; badhnati--conditions; jnana--knowledge; sangena--association; ca--also; anagha--Osinless one.
TRANSLATIONO sinless one, the mode of goodness, being purer than the others, is
illuminating, and it frees one from all sinful reactions. Thosesituated in that mode develop knowledge, but they become conditionedby the concept of happiness.
PURPORTThe living entities conditioned by material nature are of various
types. One is happy, another is very active, and another is helpless.All these types of psychological manifestations are causes of theentities' conditioned status in nature. How they are differentlyconditioned is explained in this section of Bhagavad-gita. The mode ofgoodness is first considered. The effect of developing the mode ofgoodness in the material world is that one becomes wiser than thoseotherwise conditioned. A man in the mode of goodness is not so muchaffected by material miseries, and he has a sense of advancement inmaterial knowledge. The representative type is the brahmana, who issupposed to be situated in the mode of goodness. This sense ofhappiness is due to understanding that, in the mode of goodness, one ismore or less free from sinful reactions. Actually, in the Vedicliterature it is said that the mode of goodness means greater knowledgeand a greater sense of happiness.The difficulty here is that when a living entity is situated in themode of goodness, he becomes conditioned to feel that he is advanced inknowledge and is better than others. In this way he becomesconditioned. The best examples are the scientist and philosopher: each
is very proud of his knowledge, and because they generally improve
their living conditions, they feel a sort of material happiness. Thissense of advanced happiness in conditioned life makes them bound by themode of goodness of material nature. As such, they are attracted towardworking in the mode of goodness, and, as long as they have anattraction for working in that way, they have to take some type of bodyin the modes of nature. Thus there is no likelihood of liberation, orof being transferred to the spiritual world. Repeatedly one may becomea philosopher, a scientist or a poet, and repeatedly become entangledin the same disadvantages of birth and death. But, due to the illusionof the material energy, one thinks that that sort of life is pleasant.
TEXT 7
rajo ragatmakam viddhi
trsna-sanga-samudbhavamtan nibadhnati kaunteyakarma-sangena dehinam
SYNONYMSrajah--the mode of passion; raga-atmakam--born of desire or lust;
viddhi--know; trsna--with hankering; sanga--association; samudbhavam--produced of; tat--that; nibadhnati--binds; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;karma-sangena--by association with fruitive activity; dehinam--theembodied.
TRANSLATIONThe mode of passion is born of unlimited desires and longings, O son of
Kunti, and because of this the embodied living entity is bound tomaterial fruitive actions.
PURPORTThe mode of passion is characterized by the attraction between man and
woman. Woman has attraction for man, and man has attraction for woman.This is called the mode of passion. And, when the mode of passion isincreased, one develops the hankering for material enjoyment. He wantsto enjoy sense gratification. For sense gratification, a man in themode of passion wants some honor in society, or in the nation, and hewants to have a happy family, with nice children, wife, and house.These are the products of the mode of passion. As long as one ishankering after these things, he has to work very hard. Therefore it isclearly stated here that he becomes associated with the fruits of hisactivities and thus becomes bound by such activities. In order toplease his wife, children and society and to keep up his prestige, onehas to work. Therefore, the whole material world is more or less in themode of passion. Modern civilization is considered to be advanced inthe standards of the mode of passion. Formerly, the advanced conditionwas considered to be in the mode of goodness. If there is no liberationfor those in the mode of goodness, what to speak of those who areentangled in the mode of passion?
TEXT 8
tamas tv ajnana-jam viddhi
mohanam sarva-dehinam
pramadalasya-nidrabhis
tan nibadhnati bharata
SYNONYMStamah--mode of ignorance; tu--but; ajnana-jam--products of ignorance;
viddhi--knowing; mohanam--delusion; sarva-dehinam--of all embodiedbeings; pramada--madness; alasya--indolence; nidrabhih--sleep; tat--that; nibadhnati--binds; bharata--O son of Bharata.
TRANSLATIONO son of Bharata, the mode of darkness causes the delusion of all
living entities. The result of this mode is madness, indolence andsleep, which bind the conditioned soul.
PURPORTIn this verse the specific application of the word tu is very
significant. This means that the mode of ignorance is a very peculiarqualification of the embodied soul. This mode of ignorance is just theopposite of the mode of goodness. In the mode of goodness, bydevelopment of knowledge, one can understand what is what, but the modeof ignorance is just the opposite. Everyone under the spell of the modeof ignorance becomes mad, and a madman cannot understand what is what.Instead of making advancement, one becomes degraded. The definition ofthe mode of ignorance is stated in the Vedic literature. Vastu-yathatmya-jnanavarakam viparyaya-jnana-janakam tamah: under the spellof ignorance, one cannot understand a thing as it is. For example,everyone can see that his grandfather has died, and therefore he willalso die; man is mortal. The children that he conceives will also die.So death is sure. Still, people are madly accumulating money andworking very hard all day and night, not caring for the eternal spirit.This is madness. In their madness, they are very reluctant to makeadvancement in spiritual understanding. Such people are very lazy. Whenthey are invited to associate for spiritual understanding, they are notmuch interested. They are not even active like the man who iscontrolled by the mode of passion. Thus another symptom of one embeddedin the mode of ignorance is that he sleeps more than is required. Sixhours of sleep is sufficient, but a man in the mode of ignorance sleepsat least ten or twelve hours a day. Such a man appears to be alwaysdejected and is addicted to intoxicants and sleeping. These are thesymptoms of a person conditioned by the mode of ignorance.
TEXT 9
sattvam sukhe sanjayati
rajah karmani bharatajnanam avrtya tu tamahpramade sanjayaty uta
SYNONYMSsattvam--mode of goodness; sukhe--in happiness; sanjayati--develops;
rajah--mode of passion; karmani--fruits of activities; bharata--O sonof Bharata; jnanam--knowledge; avrtya--covering; tu--but; tamah--themode of ignorance; pramade--in madness; sanjayati--develops; uta--it issaid.
TRANSLATION
The mode of goodness conditions one to happiness, passion conditions
him to fruits of action, and ignorance to madness.
PURPORTA person in the mode of goodness is satisfied by his work or
intellectual pursuit, just as a philosopher, scientist, or educator maybe engaged in a particular field of knowledge and may be satisfied inthat way. A man in the modes of passion and goodness may be engaged infruitive activity, he owns as much as he can and spends for goodcauses. Sometimes he tries to open hospitals, give to charityinstitutions, etc. These are the signs of one in the mode of passion.And the mode of ignorance covers knowledge. In the mode of ignorance,whatever one does is neither good for him nor for anyone.
TEXT 10
rajas tamas cabhibhuya
sattvam bhavati bharatarajah sattvam tamas caivatamah sattvam rajas tatha
SYNONYMSrajah--mode of passion; tamah--mode of ignorance; ca--also; abhibhuya--
also surpassing; sattvam--mode of goodness; bhavati--becomes prominent;bharata--O son of Bharata; rajah--mode of passion; sattvam--mode ofgoodness; tamah--mode of ignorance; ca--also; eva--like that; tamah--mode of ignorance; sattvam--mode of goodness; rajah--mode of passion;tatha--as in this.
TRANSLATIONSometimes the mode of passion becomes prominent, defeating the mode of
goodness, O son of Bharata. And sometimes the mode of goodness defeatspassion, and at other times the mode of ignorance defeats goodness andpassion. In this way there is always competition for supremacy.
PURPORTWhen the mode of passion is prominent, the modes of goodness and
ignorance are defeated. When the mode of goodness is prominent, passionand ignorance are defeated. And when the mode of ignorance isprominent, passion and goodness are defeated. This competition isalways going on. Therefore, one who is actually intent on advancing inKrsna consciousness has to transcend these three modes. The prominenceof some certain mode of nature is manifested in one's dealings, in hisactivities, in eating, etc. All this will be explained in laterchapters. But if one wants, he can develop, by practice, the mode ofgoodness and thus defeat the modes of ignorance and passion. One cansimilarly develop the mode of passion and defeat goodness andignorance. Or, one can develop the mode of ignorance and defeatgoodness and passion. Although there are these three modes of materialnature, if one is determined, he can be blessed by the mode ofgoodness, and by transcending the mode of goodness he can be situated
in pure goodness, which is called the vasudeva state, a state in which
one can understand the science of God. By the manifestation ofparticular activities, it can be understood in what mode of nature oneis situated.
TEXT 11
sarva-dvaresu dehe 'smin
prakasa upajayatejnanam yada tada vidyadvivrddham sattvam ity uta
SYNONYMSsarva-dvaresu--all the gates; dehe asmin--in this body; prakasah--
quality of illumination; upajayate--develops; jnanam--knowledge; yada--when; tada--at that time; vidyat--must know; vivrddham--increased;sattvam--the mode of goodness; iti--thus; uta--said.
TRANSLATIONThe manifestations of the mode of goodness can be experienced when all
the gates of the body are illuminated by knowledge.
PURPORTThere are nine gates in the body: two eyes, two ears, two nostrils, the
mouth, the genitals and the anus. In every gate, when the symptom ofgoodness is illuminated, it should be understood that one has developedthe mode of goodness. In the mode of goodness, one can see things inthe right position, one can hear things in the right position, and onecan taste things in the right position. One becomes cleansed inside andoutside. In every gate there is development of the symptoms ofhappiness, and that is the position of goodness.
TEXT 12
lobhah pravrttir arambhah
karmanam asamah sprharajasy etani jayantevivrddhe bharatarsabha
SYNONYMSlobhah--greed; pravrttih--hankering; arambhah--endeavor; karmanam--of
activities; asamah--uncontrollable; sprha--desire; rajasi--in the modeof passion; etani--all this; jayante--develop; vivrddhe--when there isexcess; bharata-rsabha--O chief of the descendants of Bharata.
TRANSLATIONO chief of the Bharatas, when there is an increase in the mode of
passion, the symptoms of great attachment, uncontrollable desire,hankering, and intense endeavor develop.
PURPORT
One in the mode of passion is never satisfied with the position he has
already acquired; he hankers to increase his position. If he wants toconstruct a residential house, he tries his best to have a palatialhouse, as if he would be able to reside in that house eternally. And hedevelops a great hankering for sense gratification. There is no end tosense gratification. He always wants to remain with his family and inhis house and to continue the process of sense gratification. There isno cessation of this. All these symptoms should be understood ascharacteristic of the mode of passion.
TEXT 13
aprakaso 'pravrttis ca
pramado moha eva catamasy etani jayantevivrddhe kuru-nandana
SYNONYMSaprakasah--darkness; apravrttih--inactivity; ca--and; pramadah--
madness; mohah--illusion; eva--certainly; ca--also; tamasi--of the modeof ignorance; etani--these; jayante--are manifested; vivrddhe--isdeveloped; kuru-nandana--O son of Kuru.
TRANSLATIONO son of Kuru, when there is an increase in the mode of ignorance,
madness, illusion, inertia and darkness are manifested.
PURPORTWhen there is no illumination, knowledge is absent. One in the mode of
ignorance does not work by a regulative principle; he wants to actwhimsically for no purpose. Even though he has the capacity to work, hemakes no endeavor. This is called illusion. Although consciousness isgoing on, life is inactive. These are the symptoms of one in the modeof ignorance.
TEXT 14
yada sattve pravrddhe tu
pralayam yati deha-bhrttadottama-vidam lokanamalan pratipadyate
SYNONYMSyada--when; sattve--mode of goodness; pravrddhe--in development; tu--
but; pralayam--dissolution; yati--goes; deha-bhrt--embodied; tada--atthat time; uttama-vidam--of the great sages; lokan--the planets;amalan--pure; pratipadyate--attains.
TRANSLATIONWhen one dies in the mode of goodness, he attains to the pure higher
planets.
PURPORT
One in goodness attains higher planetary systems, like Brahmaloka or
Janoloka, and there enjoys godly happiness. The word amalan issignificant; it means free from the modes of passion and ignorance.There are impurities in the material world, but the mode of goodness isthe purest form of existence in the material world. There are differentkinds of planets for different kinds of living entities. Those who diein the mode of goodness are elevated to the planets where great sagesand great devotees live.
TEXT 15
rajasi pralayam gatva
karma-sangisu jayatetatha pralinas tamasimudha-yonisu jayate
SYNONYMSrajasi--in passion; pralayam--dissolution; gatva--attaining; karma-
sangisu--in the association of fruitive activities; jayate--takesbirth; tatha--thereafter; pralinah--being dissolved; tamasi--inignorance; mudha--animal; yonisu--species; jayate--take birth.
TRANSLATIONWhen one dies in the mode of passion, he takes birth among those
engaged in fruitive activities; and when he dies in the mode ofignorance, he takes birth in the animal kingdom.
PURPORTSome people have the impression that when the soul reaches the platform
of human life, it never goes down again. This is incorrect. Accordingto this verse, if one develops the mode of ignorance, after his deathhe is degraded to an animal form of life. From there one has to againelevate himself, by an evolutionary process, to come again to the humanform of life. Therefore, those who are actually serious about humanlife should take to the mode of goodness and in good associationtranscend the modes and become situated in Krsna consciousness. This isthe aim of human life. Otherwise, there is no guarantee that the humanbeing will again attain to the human status.
TEXT 16
karmanah sukrtasyahuh
sattvikam nirmalam phalamrajasas tu phalam duhkhamajnanam tamasah phalam
SYNONYMSkarmanah--of work; su-krtasya--in the mode of goodness; ahuh--said;
sattvikam--mode of goodness; nirmalam--purified; phalam--result;rajasah--of the mode of passion; tu--but; phalam--result; duhkham--misery; ajnanam--nonsense; tamasah--of the mode of ignorance; phalam--result.
TRANSLATION
By acting in the mode of goodness, one becomes purified. Works done in
the mode of passion result in distress, and actions performed in themode of ignorance result in foolishness.
PURPORTBy pious activities in the mode of goodness one is purified; therefore
the sages, who are free from all illusion, are situated in happiness.Similarly activities in the mode of passion are simply miserable. Anyactivity for material happiness is bound to be defeated. If, forexample, one wants to have a skyscraper, so much human misery has to beundergone before a big skyscraper can be built. The financier has totake much trouble to earn a mass of wealth, and those who are slavingto construct the building have to render physical toil. The miseriesare there. Thus Bhagavad-gita says that in any activity performed underthe spell of the mode of passion, there is definitely great misery.There may be a little so-called mental happiness--"I have this house orthis money"--but this is not actual happiness.As far as the mode of ignorance is concerned, the performer is withoutknowledge, and therefore all his activities result in present misery,and afterwards he will go on toward animal life. Animal life is alwaysmiserable, although, under the spell of the illusory energy, maya, theanimals do not understand this. Slaughtering poor animals is also dueto the mode of ignorance. The animal killers do not know that in thefuture the animal will have a body suitable to kill them. That is thelaw of nature. In human society, if one kills a man he has to behanged. That is the law of the state. Because of ignorance, people donot perceive that there is a complete state controlled by the SupremeLord. Every living creature is a son of the Supreme Lord, and He doesnot tolerate even an ant's being killed. One has to pay for it. So,indulgence in animal killing for the taste of the tongue is thegrossest kind of ignorance. A human being has no need to kill animalsbecause God has supplied so many nice things. If one indulges in meat-eating anyway, it is to be understood that he is acting in ignoranceand is making his future very dark. Of all kinds of animal killing, thekilling of cows is most vicious because the cow gives us all kinds ofpleasure by supplying milk. Cow slaughter is an act of the grossesttype of ignorance. In the Vedic literature (Rg Veda 9.4.64) the wordsgobhih prinita-matsaram indicate that one who, being fully satisfied bymilk, is desirous of killing the cow is, in the grossest ignorance.There is also a prayer in the Vedic literature that states:
namo brahmanya-devaya
go-brahmana-hitaya cajagad-dhitaya krsnayagovindaya namo namah
"My Lord, You are the well-wisher of the cows and the brahmanas, and
You are the well-wisher of the entire human society and world." (VisnuPurana 1.19.65) The purport is that special mention is given in thatprayer for the protection of the cows and the brahmanas. Brahmanas arethe symbol of spiritual education, and cows are the symbol of the mostvaluable food; these two living creatures, the brahmanas and the cows,must be given all protection--that is real advancement of civilization.In modern human society, spiritual knowledge is neglected, and cowkilling is encouraged. It is to be understood, then, that human society
is advancing in the wrong direction and is clearing the path to its own
condemnation. A civilization which guides the citizens to becomeanimals in their next lives is certainly not a human civilization. Thepresent human civilization is, of course, grossly misled by the modesof passion and ignorance. It is a very dangerous age, and all nationsshould take care to provide the easiest process, Krsna consciousness,to save humanity from the greatest danger.
TEXT 17
sattvat sanjayate jnanam
rajaso lobha eva capramada-mohau tamasobhavato 'jnanam eva ca
SYNONYMSsattvat--from the mode of goodness; sanjayate--develops; jnanam--
knowledge; rajasah--from the mode of passion; lobhah--greed; eva--certainly; ca--also; pramada--madness; mohau--illusion; tamasah--fromthe mode of ignorance; bhavatah--develops; ajnanam--nonsense; eva--certainly; ca--also.
TRANSLATIONFrom the mode of goodness, real knowledge develops; from the mode of
passion, greed develops; and from the mode of ignorance developfoolishness, madness and illusion.
PURPORTSince the present civilization is not very congenial to the living
entities, Krsna consciousness is recommended. Through Krsnaconsciousness, society will develop the mode of goodness. When the modeof goodness is developed, people will see things as they are. In themode of ignorance, people are just like animals and cannot see thingsclearly. In the mode of ignorance, for example, they do not see that bykilling one animal they are taking a chance of being killed by the sameanimal in the next life. Because people have no education in actualknowledge, they become irresponsible. To stop this irresponsibility,education for developing the mode of goodness of the people in generalmust be there. When they are actually educated in the mode of goodness,they will become sober, in full knowledge of things as they are. Thenpeople will be happy and prosperous. Even if the majority of the peoplearen't happy and prosperous, if a certain percentage of the populationdevelops Krsna consciousness and becomes situated in the mode ofgoodness, then there is the possibility for peace and prosperity allover the world. Otherwise, if the world is devoted to the modes ofpassion and ignorance, there can be no peace or prosperity. In the modeof passion, people become greedy, and their hankering for senseenjoyment has no limit. One can see that even if one has enough moneyand adequate arrangement for sense gratification, there is neitherhappiness nor peace of mind. That is not possible because one issituated in the mode of passion. If one wants happiness at all, hismoney will not help him; he has to elevate himself to the mode ofgoodness by practicing Krsna consciousness. One engaged in the mode ofpassion is not only mentally unhappy, but his profession and occupationare also very troublesome. He has to devise so many plans and schemes
to acquire enough money to maintain his status quo. This is all
miserable. In the mode of ignorance, people become mad. Beingdistressed by their circumstances, they take shelter of intoxication,and thus they sink further into ignorance. Their future in life is verydark.
TEXT 18
urdhvam gacchanti sattva-stha
madhye tisthanti rajasahjaghanya-guna-vrtti-sthaadho gacchanti tamasah
SYNONYMSurdhvam--upwards; gacchanti--go; sattva-sthah--one who is situated in
the mode of goodness; madhye--in the middle; tisthanti--dwell; rajasah--those who are situated in the mode of passion; jaghanya--abominable;guna--quality; vrtti-sthah--occupation; adhah--down; gacchanti--go;tamasah--people in the mode of ignorance.
TRANSLATIONThose situated in the mode of goodness gradually go upward to the
higher planets; those in the mode of passion live on the earthlyplanets; and those in the mode of ignorance go down to the hellishworlds.
PURPORTIn this verse the results of actions in the three modes of nature are
more explicitly set forth. There is an upper planetary system,consisting of the heavenly planets, where everyone is highly elevated.According to the degree of development of the mode of goodness, theliving entity can be transferred to various planets in this system. Thehighest planet is Satyaloka, or Brahmaloka, where the prime person ofthis universe, Lord Brahma, resides. We have seen already that we canhardly calculate the wondrous condition of life in Brahmaloka, but thehighest condition of life, the mode of goodness, can bring us to this.The mode of passion is mixed. It is in the middle, between the modes ofgoodness and ignorance. A person is not always pure, but even if heshould be purely in the mode of passion, he will simply remain on thisearth as a king or a rich man. But because there are mixtures, one canalso go down. People on this earth, in the mode of passion orignorance, cannot forcibly approach the higher planets by machine. Inthe mode of passion, there is also the chance of becoming mad in thenext life.The lowest quality, the mode of ignorance, is described here asabominable. The result of developing ignorance is very, very risky. Itis the lowest quality in material nature. Beneath the human level thereare eight million species of life: birds, beasts, reptiles, trees,etc., and, according to the development of the mode of ignorance,people are brought down to these abominable conditions. The wordtamasah is very significant here. Tamasah indicates those who staycontinually in the mode of ignorance without rising to a higher mode.Their future is very dark.There is an opportunity for men in the modes of ignorance and passionto be elevated to the mode of goodness, and that system is called Krsna
consciousness. But one who does not take advantage of this opportunity
will certainly continue in the lower modes.
TEXT 19
nanyam gunebhyah kartaram
yada drastanupasyatigunebhyas ca param vettimad-bhavam so 'dhigacchati
SYNONYMSna--never; anyam--other than; gunebhyah--from the qualities; kartaram--
the performer; yada--when; drasta anupasyati--he who sees properly;gunebhyah ca--from the modes of nature; param--transcendental; vetti--know; mat-bhavam--My spiritual nature; sah--he; adhigacchati--ispromoted.
TRANSLATIONWhen you see that there is nothing beyond these modes of nature in all
activities and that the Supreme Lord is transcendental to all thesemodes, then you can know My spiritual nature.
PURPORTOne can transcend all the activities of the modes of material nature
simply by understanding them properly by learning from the propersouls. The real spiritual master is Krsna, and He is imparting thisspiritual knowledge to Arjuna. Similarly, it is from those who arefully in Krsna consciousness that one has to learn this science ofactivities in terms of the modes of nature. Otherwise, one's life willbe misdirected. By the instruction of a bona fide spiritual master, aliving entity can know of his spiritual position, his material body,his senses, how he is entrapped, and how he is under the spell of thematerial modes of nature. He is helpless, being in the grip of thesemodes, but when he can see his real position, then he can attain to thetranscendental platform, having the scope for spiritual life. Actually,the living entity is not the performer of different activities. He isforced to act because he is situated in a particular type of body,conducted by some particular mode of material nature. Unless one hasthe help of spiritual authority, he cannot understand in what positionhe is actually situated. With the association of a bona fide spiritualmaster, he can see his real position, and, by such an understanding, hecan become fixed in full Krsna consciousness. A man in Krsnaconsciousness is not controlled by the spell of the material modes ofnature. It has already been stated in the Seventh Chapter that one whohas surrendered to Krsna is relieved from the activities of materialnature. Therefore for one who is able to see things as they are, theinfluence of material nature gradually ceases.
TEXT 20
gunan etan atitya trin
dehi deha-samudbhavanjanma-mrtyu-jara-duhkhairvimukto 'mrtam asnute
SYNONYMS
gunan--qualities; etan--all these; atitya--transcending; trin--three;
dehi--embodied; deha--body; samudbhavan--produced of; janma--birth;mrtyu--death; jara--old age; duhkhaih--distresses; vimuktah--beingfreed from; amrtam--nectar; asnute--enjoys.
TRANSLATIONWhen the embodied being is able to transcend these three modes, he can
become free from birth, death, old age and their distresses and canenjoy nectar even in this life.
PURPORTHow one can stay in the transcendental position, even in this body, in
full Krsna consciousness, is explained in this verse. The Sanskrit worddehi means "embodied." Although one is within this material body, byhis advancement in spiritual knowledge he can be free from theinfluence of the modes of nature. He can enjoy the happiness ofspiritual life even in this body because, after leaving this body, heis certainly going to the spiritual sky. But even in this body he canenjoy spiritual happiness. In other words, devotional service in Krsnaconsciousness is the sign of liberation from material entanglement, andthis will be explained in the Eighteenth Chapter. When one is freedfrom the influence of the modes of material nature, he enters intodevotional service.
TEXT 21
arjuna uvaca
kair lingais trin gunan etanatito bhavati prabhokim acarah katham caitamstrin gunan ativartate
SYNONYMSarjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; kaih--by which; lingaih--symptoms; trin--
three; gunan--qualities; etan--all this; atitah--having transcended;bhavati--become; prabho--my Lord; kim--what; acarah--behavior; katham--what; ca--also; etan--these; trin--three; gunan--qualities; ativartate--transcend.
TRANSLATIONArjuna inquired: O my Lord, by what symptoms is one known who is
transcendental to those modes? What is his behavior? And how does hetranscend the modes of nature?
PURPORTIn this verse, Arjuna's questions are very appropriate. He wants to
know the symptoms of a person who has already transcended the materialmodes. He first inquires of the symptoms of such a transcendentalperson. How can one understand that he has already transcended theinfluence of the modes of material nature? The second question asks howhe lives and what his activities are. Are they regulated or
nonregulated? Then Arjuna inquires of the means by which he can attain
the transcendental nature. That is very important. Unless one knows thedirect means by which one can be situated always transcendentally,there is no possibility of showing the symptoms. So all these questionsput by Arjuna are very important, and the Lord answers them.
TEXTS 22-25
sri-bhagavan uvaca
prakasam ca pravrttim camoham eva ca pandavana dvesti sampravrttanina nivrttani kanksati
udasina-vad asino
gunair yo na vicalyateguna vartanta ity evamyo 'vatisthati nengate
sama-duhkha-sukhah sva-sthah
sama-lostasma-kancanahtulya-priyapriyo dhirastulya-nindatma-samstutih
manapamanayos tulyas
tulyo mitrari-paksayohsarvarambha-parityagigunatitah sa ucyate
SYNONYMSsri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; prakasam
ca--and illumination; pravrttim ca--and attachment; moham--illusion;eva ca--also; pandava--O son of Pandu; na dvesti--does not hate;sampravrttani--although developed; na nivrttani--nor stop development;kanksati--desires; udasina-vat--as if neutral; asinah--situated;gunaih--by the qualities; yah--one who; na--never; vicalyate--isagitated; gunah--the qualities; vartante--is situated; iti evam--knowing thus; yah--one who; avatisthati--remains; na--never; ingate--flickering; sama--equal; duhkha--in distress; sukhah--in happiness;sva-sthah--being situated himself; sama--equally; losta--a lump ofearth; asma--stone; kancanah--gold; tulya--equally disposed; priya--dear; apriyah--undesirable; dhirah--steady; tulya--equally; ninda--indefamation; atma-samstutih--in praise of himself; mana--in honor;apamanayoh--dishonor; tulyah--equally; tulyah--equally; mitra--friend;ari--enemy; paksayoh--in parties; sarva--all; arambha--endeavor;parityagi--renouncer; guna-atitah--transcendental to the material modesof nature; sah--he; ucyate--is said to be.
TRANSLATIONThe Blessed Lord said: He who does not hate illumination, attachment
and delusion when they are present, nor longs for them when theydisappear; who is seated like one unconcerned, being situated beyondthese material reactions of the modes of nature, who remains firm,knowing that the modes alone are active; who regards alike pleasure andpain, and looks on a lump of earth, a stone and a piece of gold with anequal eye; who is wise and holds praise and blame to be the same; who
is unchanged in honor and dishonor, who treats friend and foe alike,
who has abandoned all fruitive undertakings--such a man is said to havetranscended the modes of nature.
PURPORTArjuna submitted three different questions, and the Lord answers them
one after another. In these verses, Krsna first indicates that a persontranscendentally situated neither envies anyone nor hankers foranything. When a living entity stays in this material world embodied bythe material body, it is to be understood that he is under the controlof one of the three modes of material nature. When he is actually outof the body, then he is out of the clutches of the material modes ofnature. But as long as he is not out of the material body, he should beneutral. He should engage himself in the devotional service of the Lordso that his identity with the material body will automatically beforgotten. When one is conscious of the material body, he acts only forsense gratification, but when one transfers the consciousness to Krsna,sense gratification automatically stops. One does not need thismaterial body, and he does not need to accept the dictations of thematerial body. The qualities of the material modes in the body willact, but as spirit soul the self is aloof from such activities. Howdoes he become aloof? He does not desire to enjoy the body, nor does hedesire to get out of it. Thus transcendentally situated, the devoteebecomes automatically free. He need not try to become free from theinfluence of the modes of material nature.The next question concerns the dealings of a transcendentally situatedperson. The materially situated person is affected by so-called honorand dishonor offered to the body, but the transcendentally situatedperson is not affected by such false honor and dishonor. He performshis duty in Krsna consciousness and does not mind whether a man honorsor dishonors him. He accepts things that are favorable for his duty inKrsna consciousness, otherwise he has no necessity of anythingmaterial, either a stone or gold. He takes everyone as his dear friendwho helps him in his execution of Krsna consciousness, and he does nothate his so-called enemy. He is equally disposed and sees everything onan equal level because he knows perfectly well that he has nothing todo with material existence. Social and political issues do not affecthim because he knows the situation of temporary upheavals anddisturbances. He does not attempt anything for his own sake. He canattempt anything for Krsna, but for his personal self he does notattempt anything. By such behavior one becomes actuallytranscendentally situated.
TEXT 26
mam ca yo 'vyabhicarena
bhakti-yogena sevatesa gunan samatityaitanbrahma-bhuyaya kalpate
SYNONYMSmam--unto Me; ca--also; yah--person; avyabhicarena--without fail;
bhakti-yogena--by devotional service; sevate--renders service; sah--he;gunan--all the modes of material nature; samatitya--transcending; etan--all this; brahma-bhuyaya--to be elevated to the Brahman platform;kalpate--is considered.
TRANSLATION
One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in
any circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature andthus comes to the level of Brahman.
PURPORTThis verse is a reply to Arjuna's third question: What is the means of
attaining to the transcendental position? As explained before, thematerial world is acting under the spell of the modes of materialnature. One should not be disturbed by the activities of the modes ofnature; instead of putting his consciousness into such activities, hemay transfer his consciousness to Krsna activities. Krsna activitiesare known as bhakti-yoga--always acting for Krsna. This includes notonly Krsna, but His different plenary expansions such as Rama andNarayana. He has innumerable expansions. One who is engaged in theservice of any of the forms of Krsna, or of His plenary expansions, isconsidered to be transcendentally situated. One should also note thatall the forms of Krsna are fully transcendental, blissful, full ofknowledge and eternal. Such personalities of Godhead are omnipotent andomniscient, and they possess all transcendental qualities. So, if oneengages himself in the service of Krsna or His plenary expansions withunfailing determination, although these modes of material nature arevery difficult to overcome, he can overcome them easily. This hasalready been explained in the Seventh Chapter. One who surrenders untoKrsna at once surmounts the influence of the modes of material nature.To be in Krsna consciousness or in devotional service means to acquireequality with Krsna. The Lord says that His nature is eternal, blissfuland full of knowledge, and the living entities are part and parcel ofthe Supreme, as gold particles are part of a gold mine. Thus the livingentity's spiritual position is as good as gold, as good as Krsna inquality. The difference of individuality continues, otherwise there isno question of bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga means that the Lord is there,the devotee is there and the activity of exchange of love between theLord and the devotee is there. Therefore the individuality of twopersons is present in the Supreme Personality of Godhead and theindividual person, otherwise there would be no meaning to bhakti-yoga.If one is not situated in the same transcendental position with theLord, one cannot serve the Supreme Lord. To be a personal assistant toa king, one must acquire the qualifications. Thus the qualification isto become Brahman, or freed from all material contamination. It is saidin the Vedic literature, brahmaiva san brahmapy eti. One can attain theSupreme Brahman by becoming Brahman. This means that one mustqualitatively become one with Brahman. By attainment of Brahman, onedoes not lose his eternal Brahman identity as an individual soul.
TEXT 27
brahmano hi pratisthaham
amrtasyavyayasya casasvatasya ca dharmasyasukhasyaikantikasya ca
SYNONYMS
brahmanah--of the impersonal brahmajyoti; hi--certainly; pratistha--the
rest; aham--I am; amrtasya--of the immortal; avyayasya--of theimperishable; ca--also; sasvatasya--of the eternal; ca--and; dharmasya--of the constitutional position; sukhasya--happiness; aikantikasya--ultimate; ca--also.
TRANSLATIONAnd I am the basis of impersonal Brahman, which is the constitutional
position of ultimate happiness, and which is immortal, imperishable andeternal.
PURPORTThe constitution of Brahman is immortality, imperishability, eternity,
and happiness. Brahman is the beginning of transcendental realization.Paramatma, the Supersoul, is the middle, the second stage intranscendental realization, and the Supreme Personality of Godhead isthe ultimate realization of the Absolute Truth. Therefore, bothParamatma and the impersonal Brahman are within the Supreme Person. Itis explained in the Seventh Chapter that material nature is themanifestation of the inferior energy of the Supreme Lord. The Lordimpregnates the inferior material nature with fragments of the superiornature, and that is the spiritual touch in the material nature. When aliving entity conditioned by this material nature begins thecultivation of spiritual knowledge, he elevates himself from theposition of material existence and gradually rises up to the Brahmanconception of the Supreme. This attainment of the Brahman conception oflife is the first stage in self-realization. At this stage the Brahman-realized person is transcendental to the material position, but he isnot actually perfect in Brahman realization. If he wants, he cancontinue to stay in the Brahman position and then gradually rise up toParamatma realization and then to the realization of the SupremePersonality of Godhead. There are many examples of this in Vedicliterature. The four Kumaras were situated first in the impersonalBrahman conception of truth, but then they gradually rose to theplatform of devotional service. One who cannot elevate himself beyondthe impersonal conception of Brahman runs the risk of falling down. InSrimad-Bhagavatam it is stated that although a person may rise to thestage of impersonal Brahman, without going further, with no informationof the Supreme Person, his intelligence is not perfectly clear.Therefore, in spite of being raised to the Brahman platform, there isthe chance of falling down if one is not engaged in the devotionalservice of the Lord. In the Vedic language it is also said, raso vaisah, rasam hy evayam labdhvanandi bhavati: "When one understands thePersonality of Godhead, the reservoir of pleasure, Krsna, he actuallybecomes transcendentally blissful." (Taittiriya Upanisad 2.7.1) TheSupreme Lord is full in six opulences, and when a devotee approachesHim, there is an exchange of these six opulences. The servant of theking enjoys on an almost equal level with the king. And so, eternalhappiness, imperishable happiness, and eternal life accompanydevotional service. Therefore, realization of Brahman, or eternity, orimperishability is included in devotional service. This is alreadypossessed by a person who is engaged in devotional service.The living entity, although Brahman by nature, has the desire to lordit over the material world, and due to this he falls down. In hisconstitutional position, a living entity is above the three modes ofmaterial nature, but association with material nature entangles him in
