9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita Chapter-15 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/872439 1/12Name: ___________________________________________ Date: ___________________
Bhagavadgita Chapter-15
1. What is the purpose of vedic study? BG 15.1
the purpose of Vedic study is to understand K ṛṣṇ a. Therefore one who is in K ṛṣṇ a
consciousness, who is engaged in devotional service, already knows the Vedas.
2. Why entanglement of this material world is compared here to a banyan tree? BG 15.1
For one who is engaged in fruitive activities, there is no end to the banyan tree. He
wanders from one branch to another, to another, to another. The tree of this material
world has no end, and for one who is attached to this tree, there is no possibility of
liberation.
3. To what the Vedic hymns compared here? BG 15.1
The Vedic hymns, meant for elevating oneself, are called the leaves of this tree.
4. How one can get out of this illusion? BG 15.1
This tree’s roots grow upward because they begin from where Brahmā is located, the
topmost planet of this universe. If one can understand this indestructible tree of
illusion, then one can get out of it.
5. What is the tree of this material world is? BG 15.1
the tree of this material world is only a reﬂection of the real tree of the spiritual world.
This reﬂection of the spiritual world is situated on desire, just as a tree’s reﬂection is
situated on water. Desire is the cause of things’ being situated in this reﬂected material
light.
6. In what way divide up the whole material world into twenty-four elements? BG 15.1
The impersonalists take Brahman to be the root of this material tree, and from the
root, according to Sā ṅ khya philosophy, come prak ṛ ti, puru ṣ a, then the three gu ṇ as,
then the ﬁve gross elements (pañca-mahā-bhūta), then the ten senses (daśendriya),
mind, etc. In this way they divide up the whole material world into twenty-four
elements.
7. How the spiritual world must have the same variegatedness? BG 15.1
If Brahman is the center of all manifestations, then this material world is a
manifestation of the center by 180 degrees, and the other 180 degrees constitute the
spiritual world. The material world is the perverted reﬂection, so the spiritual world
must have the same variegatedness,
8. How the prak ṛ ti and puru ṣ a is explained? BG 15.1
The prak ṛ ti is the external energy of the Supreme Lord, and the puru ṣ a is the Supreme
Lord Himself,
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita Chapter-15 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/872439 2/129. What is the purpose of Vedas? BG 15.1
One who is attracted by the ritualistic formulas of the Vedas is attracted by the
beautiful green leaves of the tree. He does not exactly know the purpose of the Vedas.
The purpose of the Vedas, as disclosed by the Personality of Godhead Himself, is to cut
down this reﬂected tree and attain the real tree of the spiritual world.
10. What are the lower parts of the branches of banyan tree? BG 15.2
The description of the banyan tree is further explained here. Its branches spread in all
directions. In the lower parts, there are variegated manifestations of living entities –
human beings, animals, horses, cows, dogs, cats, etc. These are situated on the lower
parts of the branches,
11. What are the upper part of the banyan tree contains of? BG 15.2
whereas on the upper parts are higher forms of living entities: the demigods,
Gandharvas and many other higher species of life.
12. How the banyan tree is nourished by the three modes of material nature? BG 15.2
Sometimes we ﬁnd that a tract of land is barren for want of sufﬁcient water, and
sometimes a tract is very green; similarly, where particular modes of material nature
are proportionately greater in quantity, the different species of life are manifested
accordingly
13. How the twigs of the banyan tree is compared to? BG 15.2
The twigs of the tree are considered to be the sense objects. By development of the
different modes of nature we develop different senses, and by the senses we enjoy
different varieties of sense objects. The tips of the branches are the senses – the ears,
nose, eyes, etc
14. The subsidiary roots of banyan tree are compared to? BG 15.2
The subsidiary roots are attachments and aversions, which are by-products of different
varieties of suffering and sense enjoyment.
15. What are the piety and impiety are considered as? BG 15.2
The tendencies toward piety and impiety are considered to develop from these
secondary roots, which spread in all directions.
16. What is the real root is from ? BG 15.2
The real root is from Brahmaloka, and the other roots are in the human planetary
systems.
17. Which planet of human beings is considered the ﬁeld of activities? BG 15.2
After one enjoys the results of virtuous activities in the upper planetary systems, he
comes down to this earth and renews his karma, or fruitive activities for promotion.
This planet of human beings is considered the ﬁeld of activities.
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita Chapter-15 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/872439 3/1218. Is the real form of this banyan can be understood in this material world? BG 15.3-4
No it cannot be understood in this material world. Since the root is upwards, the
extension of the real tree is at the other end. When entangled with the material
expansions of the tree, one cannot see how far the tree extends, nor can one see the
beginning of this tree. Yet one has to ﬁnd out the cause.
19. How one becomes gradually detached from this false reﬂection of reality? BG 15.3-4
One has to search out that origin of this tree, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
through the association of persons who are in knowledge of that Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Then by understanding one becomes gradually detached from this false
reﬂection of reality,
20. How one can become situated in the real tree? BG 15.3-4
by knowledge one can cut off the connection and actually become situated in the real
tree.
21. Why the word asa ṅ ga is very important ? BG 15.3-4
The word asa ṅ ga is very important in this connection because the attachment for sense
enjoyment and lording it over the material nature is very strong. Therefore one must
learn detachment by discussion of spiritual science based on authoritative scriptures,
and one must hear from persons who are actually in knowledge.
22. Who is the original root of the tree? BG 15.3-4
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, K ṛṣṇ a, is the original root from whom everything
has emanated.
23. What one should do to gain the favor of that Personality of Godhead? BG 15.3-4
one has only to surrender, and this is a result of performing devotional service by
hearing, chanting, etc.
24. What is the meaning of Aha ṁ sarvasya prabhava ḥ ? BG 15.3-4
I am the origin of everything.” Therefore to get out of the entanglement of this strong
banyan tree of material life, one must surrender to K ṛṣṇ a. As soon as one surrenders
unto K ṛṣṇ a, one becomes detached automatically from this material extension.
25. What is the ﬁrst qualiﬁcation to surrender? BG 15.5
The ﬁrst qualiﬁcation is that one should not be deluded by pride. Because the
conditioned soul is puffed up, thinking himself the lord of material nature, it is very
difﬁcult for him to surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
26. Who can begin the process of surrender? BG 15.5
One should know by the cultivation of real knowledge that he is not lord of material
nature; the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the Lord. When one is free from delusion
caused by pride, he can begin the process of surrender.
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita Chapter-15 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/872439 4/1227. Who has the foolish notion that he is the lord of the world? BG 15.5
For one who is always expecting some honor in this material world, it is not possible to
surrender to the Supreme Person. Pride is due to illusion, for although one comes here,
stays for a brief time and then goes away, he has the foolish notion that he is the lord
of the world.
28. Who has false impression that they are the proprietors? BG 15.5
He thus makes all things complicated, and he is always in trouble. The whole world
moves under this impression. People are considering the land, this earth, to belong to
human society, and they have divided the land under the false impression that they are
the proprietors.
29. Which faulty associations bind one to this material world? BG 15.5
One has to get out of this false notion that human society is the proprietor of this
world. When one is freed from such a false notion, he becomes free from all the false
associations caused by familial, social and national affections. These faulty associations
bind one to this material world.
30. What happens if once understanding of things as they are? BG 15.5
one has to develop spiritual knowledge. One has to cultivate knowledge of what is
actually his own and what is actually not his own. And when one has an understanding
of things as they are, he becomes free from all dual conceptions
31. When it is possible for one surrender to the Supreme Personality of Godhead? BG 15.5
when one has an understanding of things as they are, he becomes free from all dual
conceptions such as happiness and distress, pleasure and pain. He becomes full in
knowledge; then it is possible for him to surrender to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
32. Which is Goloka V ṛ ndāvana? BG 15.6
The spiritual world, the abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, K ṛṣṇ a – which is
known as K ṛṣṇ aloka, Goloka V ṛ ndāvana
33. How all the planets in the spiritual sky are self-luminous? BG 15.6
In the spiritual sky there is no need of sunshine, moonshine, ﬁre or electricity, because
all the planets are self-luminous. We have only one planet in this universe, the sun,
which is self-luminous, but all the planets in the spiritual sky are self-luminous.
34. What is known as the brahma-jyotir? BG 15.6
The shining effulgence of all those planets (called Vaiku ṇṭ has) constitutes the shining
sky known as the brahma-jyotir
35. What is covered by the mahat-tattva? BG 15.6
Actually, the effulgence is emanating from the planet of K ṛṣṇ a, Goloka V ṛ ndāvana. Part
of that shining effulgence is covered by the mahat-tattva,
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita Chapter-15 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/872439 5/1236. which are called Vaiku ṇṭ has, chief of which is Goloka V ṛ ndāvana? BG 15.6
the material world. Other than this, the major portion of that shining sky is full of
spiritual planets, which are called Vaiku ṇṭ has, chief of which is Goloka V ṛ ndāvana.
37. When the living entity becomes liberated? BG 15.6
As long as a living entity is in this dark material world, he is in conditional life, but as
soon as he reaches the spiritual sky by cutting through the false, perverted tree of this
material world, he becomes liberated.
38. Who is eternally fragmented? BG 15.7
The living entity is the fragmental part and parcel of the Supreme Lord – eternally. It is
not that he assumes individuality in his conditional life and in his liberated state
becomes one with the Supreme Lord. He is eternally fragmented.
39. What is personal expansion and separated expansions? B G 15.7
vi ṣṇu-tattva is the personal expansion, and the living entities are the separated
expansions.
40. Why the living entity has to struggle very hard to maintain his existence in the material world? BG 15.7
The living entity in his conditioned life he is dominated by the material modes of
nature, and he forgets the transcendental loving service of the Lord. As a result, he has
to struggle very hard to maintain his existence in the material world.
41. How the conditioned soul is bound up by? BG 15.7
He is bound up by the false ego, and the mind is the chief agent which is driving him in
this material existence.
42. How the mind is for condition soul? BG 15.7
When the mind is in the mode of goodness, his activities are good; when the mind is in
the mode of passion, his activities are troublesome; and when the mind is in the mode
of ignorance, he travels in the lower species of life.
43. How people live in spiritual planet? BG 15.7
in the spiritual planets everyone lives in bodies featured like the Supreme Personality of
Godhead’s. As far as bodily construction is concerned, there is no difference between
the part-and-parcel living entities and the expansions of vi ṣṇ u-mūrti. In other words, at
liberation the living entity gets a spiritual body by the grace of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.
44. Why the living entity is described as īśvara? BG 15.8
the controller of his own body. If he likes, he can change his body to a higher grade,
and if he likes he can move to a lower class. Minute independence is there. The change
his body undergoes depends upon him. At the time of death
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita Chapter-15 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/872439 6/1245. How At the time of death the living entity can change in his next life? BG 15.8
At the time of death, the consciousness he has created will carry him on to the next
type of body. If he has made his consciousness like that of a cat or dog, he is sure to
change to a cat’s or dog’s body. And if he has ﬁxed his consciousness on godly qualities,
he will change into the form of a demigod. And if he is in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness, he will
be transferred to K ṛṣṇ aloka in the spiritual world and will associate with K ṛṣṇ a.
46. It is a false claim that after the annihilation of this body everything is ﬁnished? BG 15.8
The individual soul is transmigrating from one body to another, and his present body
and present activities are the background of his next body.
47. What is called kar ṣ ati? BG 15.8
One gets a different body according to karma, and he has to quit this body in due
course. It is stated here that the subtle body, which carries the conception of the next
body, develops another body in the next life. This process of transmigrating from one
body to another and struggling while in the body is called kar ṣ ati, or struggle for
existence.
48. What happens if the living entity adulterates his consciousness with the qualities of cats and dogs? BG 15.9
in his next life he gets a cat or dog body and enjoys.
49. How is the Consciousness is originally? BG 15.9
Consciousness is originally pure, like water. But if we mix water with a certain color, it
changes.
50. What is the Real consciousness? BG 15.9
Real consciousness is K ṛṣṇ a consciousness. When, therefore, one is situated in K ṛṣṇ a
consciousness, he is in his pure life.
51. But if his consciousness is adulterated by some type of material mentality? BG 15.9
in the next life he gets a corresponding body. He does not necessarily get a human body
again; he can get the body of a cat, dog, hog, demigod or one of many other forms, for
there are 8,400,000 species.
52. Why word jñāna-cak ṣ u ṣ a ḥ is very signiﬁcant? BG 15.10
Without knowledge, one cannot understand how a living entity leaves his present body,
nor what form of body he is going to take in the next life, nor even why he is living in a
particular type of body. This requires a great amount of knowledge understood from
Bhagavad-gītā and similar literatures heard from a bona ﬁde spiritual master.
53. Why living entity is suffering different kinds of happiness and distress, under the illusion of sense enjoyment?
BG 15.10
Every living entity is quitting his body under certain circumstances, he is living under
certain circumstances, and he is enjoying under certain circumstances under the spell
of material nature.
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita Chapter-15 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/872439 7/1254. Who will lose all power to understand their change of body and their stay in a particular body? BG 15.10
Persons who are everlastingly fooled by lust and desire lose all power to understand
their change of body and their stay in a particular body. They cannot comprehend it.
55. Those who have developed spiritual knowledge how they will be ? BG 15.10
however, can see that the spirit is different from the body and is changing its body and
enjoying in different ways. A person in such knowledge can understand how the
conditioned living entity is suffering in this material existence.
56. those who are highly developed in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness what they will try to do? BG 15.10
They try their best to give this knowledge to the people in general, for their conditional
life is very much troublesome. They should come out of it and be K ṛṣṇ a conscious and
liberate themselves to transfer to the spiritual world.
57. How the transcendentalists on the path of spiritual self-realization? BG 15.11
There are many transcendentalists on the path of spiritual self-realization, but one who
is not situated in self-realization cannot see how things are changing in the body of the
living entity.
58. Why the word yogina ḥ is signiﬁcant in this connection? BG 15.11
In the present day there are many so-called yogīs, and there are many so-called
associations of yogīs, but they are actually blind in the matter of self-realization
59. Who are called yatanto?BG 15.11
They are simply addicted to some sort of gymnastic exercise and are satisﬁed if the
body is well built and healthy. They have no other information. They are called yatanto
60. Why they are not self-realized? BG 15.11
Even though they are endeavoring in a so-called yoga system, they are not self-realized.
Such people cannot understand the process of the transmigration of the soul.
61. How the bhakti-yogīs can understand how things are taking place? BG 15.11
Only those who are actually in the yoga system and have realized the self, the world
and the Supreme Lord – in other words, the bhakti-yogīs, those engaged in pure
devotional service in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness – can understand how things are taking place.
62. How one can understand electricity or ﬁre are coming from the Supreme Personality of Godhead? BG 15.12
Everyone sees the sun, moon, ﬁre and electricity. One should simply try to understand
that the splendor of the sun, the splendor of the moon, and the splendor of electricity
or ﬁre are coming from the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
63. How the beginning of K ṛṣṇ a consciousness helps? BG 15.12
the beginning of K ṛṣṇ a consciousness, lies a great deal of advancement for the
conditioned soul in this material world.
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita Chapter-15 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/872439 8/1264. How one can come back to Godhead, back to home? BG 15.12
The living entities are essentially the parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord, and He is
giving herewith the hint how they can come back to Godhead, back to home.
65. When one’s K ṛṣṇ a consciousness will begin? BG 15.12
if one can understand that the light and splendor of the sun, moon and ﬁre are
emanating from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, K ṛṣṇ a, then one’s K ṛṣṇ a
consciousness will begin.
66. When people can understand the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, K ṛṣṇ a? BG 15.12
By the moonshine, all the vegetables are nourished. The moonshine is so pleasing that
people can easily understand that they are living by the mercy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, K ṛṣṇ a.
67. What are are some thoughts to provoke K ṛṣṇ a consciousness in the conditioned soul? BG 15.12
Without His mercy there cannot be sun, without His mercy there cannot be moon, and
without His mercy there cannot be ﬁre, and without the help of sun, moon and ﬁre, no
one can live. These are some thoughts to provoke K ṛṣṇ a consciousness in the
conditioned soul.
68. How the planets are ﬂoating in the air? BG 15.13
It is understood that all the planets are ﬂoating in the air only by the energy of the
Lord.
69. How the floting planets are actually held in the ﬁst of the universal form of the Supreme Lord? BG 15.13
just like a handful of dust. If someone holds a handful of dust, there is no possibility of
the dust’s falling, but if one throws it in the air it will fall down. Similarly, these
planets, which are ﬂoating in the air, are actually held in the ﬁst of the universal form
of the Supreme Lord.
70. How mankind could not survive without Lord? BG 15.13
Human society is working, living comfortably and enjoying food due to the supply from
the Supreme Lord. Otherwise, mankind could not survive.
71. Why The word rasātmaka ḥ is very signiﬁcant? BG 15.13
Everything becomes palatable by the agency of the Supreme Lord through the inﬂuence
of the moon.
72. According to Āyur-vedic śāstra what we understand about fire in stomach? BG 15.14
we understand that there is a ﬁre in the stomach which digests all food sent there.
73. How this ﬁre is representative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead? BG 15.14
When the ﬁre is not blazing there is no hunger, and when the ﬁre is in order we become
hungry. Sometimes when the ﬁre is not going nicely, treatment is required. In any case,
this ﬁre is representative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita Chapter-15 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/872439 9/1274. How the living entity is not independent in the eating process? BG 15.14
Vedic mantras also conﬁrm that the Supreme Lord or Brahman is situated in the form of
ﬁre within the stomach and is digesting all kinds of foodstuff (ayam agnir vaiśvānaro yo
’yam anta ḥ puru ṣ e yenedam anna ṁ pacyate). Therefore since He is helping the
digestion of all kinds of foodstuff, the living entity is not independent in the eating
process.
75. How we are enjoying life? BG 15.14
Unless the Supreme Lord helps him in digesting, there is no possibility of eating. He
thus produces and digests foodstuff, and by His grace we are enjoying life.
76. Where are Lord situated in? BG 15.14
the Lord is situated within sound and within the body, within the air and even within
the stomach as the digestive force.
77. What are the four kind of foodstuff? BG 15.14
There are four kinds of foodstuff – some are drunk, some are chewed, some are licked
up, and some are sucked – and He is the digestive force for all of them.
78. Howthe living entityhas to act? BG 15.15
The Supreme Lord is situated as Paramātmā in everyone’s heart, and it is from Him that
all activities are initiated. The living entity forgets everything of his past life, but he
has to act according to the direction of the Supreme Lord, who is witness to all his
work.
79. How the Lord is not only all-pervading; He is also localized in every individual heart? BG 15.15
he begins his work according to his past deeds. Required knowledge is supplied to him,
and remembrance is given to him, and he forgets, also, about his past life. Thus, the
Lord is not only all-pervading; He is also localized in every individual heart.
80. What are the different forms Lord is worshipable? BG 15.15
He awards the different fruitive results. He is worshipable not only as the impersonal
Brahman, the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the localized Paramātmā, but as the
form of the incarnation of the Vedas as well.
81. What are the Vedas offer ? BG 15.15
The Vedas give the right direction to people so that they can properly mold their lives
and come back to Godhead, back to home. The Vedas offer knowledge of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, K ṛṣṇ a, and K ṛṣṇ a in His incarnation as Vyāsadeva is the
compiler of the Vedānta-sūtra.
82. What is the real understanding of Vedānta-sūtra? BG 15.15
The commentation on the Vedānta-sūtra by Vyāsadeva in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam gives
the real understanding of Vedānta-sūtra.
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita Chapter-15 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/872439 10/1283. How the God is all-good; God is all-merciful ? BG 15.15
He is the supplier and digester of foodstuff, the witness of his activity, and the giver of
knowledge in the form of the Vedas and as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī
K ṛṣṇa, the teacher of the Bhagavad-gītā. He is worshipable by the conditioned soul.
Thus God is all-good; God is all-merciful.
84. How the living entity receives the opportunity to understand the Vedas from Lord?BG 15.15
Lord gives him the intelligence to renew his work where he ended his last life. So not
only does a living entity enjoy or suffer in this world according to the dictation from the
Supreme Lord situated locally in the heart, but he receives the opportunity to
understand the Vedas from Him.
85. What is the purpose of the Vedas? BG 15.15
In all Vedic literature, beginning from the four Vedas, Vedānta-sūtra and the Upani ṣ ads
and Purā ṇ as, the glories of the Supreme Lord are celebrated. By performance of Vedic
rituals, discussion of the Vedic philosophy and worship of the Lord in devotional service,
He is attained. Therefore the purpose of the Vedas is to understand K ṛṣṇ a.
86. How One can attain perfection in three stages ? BG 15.15
By understanding Vedic literature one can understand his relationship with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, by performing the different processes one can approach Him,
and at the end one can attain the supreme goal, who is no other than the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
87. How many class the living entities divided in to? and what? BG 15.16
The living entities can be divided into two classes – the fallible and the infallible.
88. When the living entities called jīva-bhūta? BG 15.16
The living entities are eternally separated parts and parcels of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. When they are in contact with the material world they are called jīva-
bhūta, mean that they are fallible
89. What are called infallible? BG 15.16
Those who are in oneness with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, however, are
called infallible.
90. How the living entity appears to be changing? BG 15.16
As long as a living entity is conditioned, his body changes due to contact with matter;
matter is changing, so the living entity appears to be changing.
91. What is clearly stated about innumerable living entities? BG 15.17
It is clearly stated there that above the innumerable living entities, some of whom are
conditioned and some of whom are liberated,
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita Chapter-15 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/872439 11/1292. who maintains them and gives them all the facility of enjoyment according to different work? BG 15.17
The purport is that amongst all the living entities, both conditioned and liberated,
there is one supreme living personality, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who
maintains them and gives them all the facility of enjoyment according to different
work.
93. Who is eligible to attain perfect peace? BG 15.17
That Supreme Personality of Godhead is situated in everyone’s heart as Paramātmā. A
wise man who can understand Him is eligible to attain perfect peace, not others.
94. Who is the greatest of personalities? BG 15.18
No one can surpass the Supreme Personality of Godhead, K ṛṣṇ a – neither the
conditioned soul nor the liberated soul. He is therefore the greatest of personalities.
95. Why It is incorrect to think of the Supreme Lord and the living entities as being on the same level in all
aspects? BG 15.18
The difference is that the living entities, either in the conditioned state or in the
liberated state, cannot surpass in quantity the inconceivable potencies of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. It is incorrect to think of the Supreme Lord and the living
entities as being on the same level or equal in all respects.
96. Why the word uttama is very signiﬁcant? BG 15.18
No one can surpass the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
97. How Lord explains the Vedic knowledge as Vyāsadeva? BG 15.18
That Supreme Personality also has a localized aspect as Paramātmā. By incarnating
Himself as the son of Satyavatī and Parāśara, He explains the Vedic knowledge as
Vyāsadeva.
98. Who is the knower of everything? BG 15.19
the Supreme Personality of Godhead clearly explains that anyone who knows Lord K ṛṣṇ a
to be the Supreme Person is actually the knower of everything.
99. Who will know the purpose of the Vedas? BG 15.19
Anyone who is able to understand this, according to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Śrī K ṛṣṇ a, knows the purpose of the Vedas; no one else knows the purpose of
the Vedas.
100. Why the word bhajati is very signiﬁcant? BG 15.19
In many places the word bhajati is expressed in relationship with the service of the
Supreme Lord. If a person is engaged in full K ṛṣṇ a consciousness, in the devotional
service of the Lord, it is to be understood that he has understood all the Vedic
knowledge.
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita Chapter-15 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/872439 12/12101. When speculation for so many years and lives is a useless waste of time? BG 15.19
if anyone, after speculating for hundreds of thousands of lives, does not come to the
point that K ṛṣṇ a is the Supreme Personality of Godhead and that one has to surrender
there, all his speculation for so many years and lives is a useless waste of time.
102. How Lord explain about ignorance? BG 15.20
The Lord is said to be the sun, and ignorance is called darkness. Where the sun is
present, there is no question of darkness. Therefore, whenever devotional service is
present under the proper guidance of a bona ﬁde spiritual master, there is no question
of ignorance.
103. What is the word anagha means? Bg 15.20
The word anagha, by which Arjuna is addressed, is signiﬁcant. Anagha, “O sinless one,”
means that unless one is free from all sinful reactions it is very difﬁcult to understand
K ṛṣṇa.
