9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita chapter-8 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/846976 1/11Name: ___________________________________________ Date: ___________________
Bhagavadgita chapter-8
1. What is Lord Krishna`s answer to Arjuna`s question What is Brahman? BG 8.1
The Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam explains that the Supreme Absolute Truth is known as
Brahman, Paramātmā and Bhagavān. In addition, the living entity, the individual soul, is
also called Brahman.
2. Arjuna also inquires about what is ātmā ? BG 8.1
Atma refers to body, soul and mind. According to the Vedic dictionary, ātmā refers to
the mind, soul, body and senses also.
3. Why Arjuna has addressed the Supreme Lord as Puru ṣ ottama? BG 8.1
Supreme Person, which means that he was putting these questions not simply to a
friend but to the Supreme Person, knowing Him to be the supreme authority able to
give deﬁnitive answers.
4. Who is Lord of sacriﬁce referred as? BG 8.2
Lord of sacriﬁce” may refer to either Indra or Vi ṣṇ u
5. Who is the chief of the primal demigods? BG 8.2
Vi ṣṇu is the chief of the primal demigods, including Brahmā and Śiva
6. Who is the chief of the administrative demigods? BG 8.2
Indra is the chief of the administrative demigods
7. Which god are worshiped by yajña performances? BG 8.2
Both Indra and Vi ṣṇ u are worshiped by yajña performances.
8. Arjuna asks who is actually the Lord of yajña (sacriﬁce) and how the Lord is residing within the body of the
living entity why he should not get these questions? BG 8.2
because Arjuna is a K ṛṣṇ a conscious devotee. Therefore these doubts are like demons.
Since K ṛṣṇ a is so expert in killing demons, Arjuna here addresses Him as Madhusūdana
so that K ṛṣṇ a might kill the demonic doubts that arise in Arjuna’s mind.
9. What is the word prayā ṇ a-kāle in this verse is very signiﬁcant? BG 8.2
the word prayā ṇ a-kāle in this verse is very signiﬁcant because whatever we do in life
will be tested at the time of death.
10. What should be K ṛṣṇ a conscious person position at that ﬁnal moment? BG 8.2
At the time of death all the bodily functions are disrupted, and the mind is not in a
proper condition. Thus disturbed by the bodily situation, one may not be able to
remember the Supreme Lord.
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita chapter-8 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/846976 2/1111. What Mahārāja Kulaśekhara, a great devotee, prays to god? BG 8.2
“My dear Lord, just now I am quite healthy, and it is better that I die immediately so
that the swan of my mind can seek entrance at the stem of Your lotus feet.”
12. What metaphor is used because the swan, a bird of the water? BG 8.2
the swan, a bird of the water, takes pleasure in digging into the lotus ﬂowers; its
sporting proclivity is to enter the lotus ﬂower.
13. What Mahārāja Kulaśekhara says to the Lord? BG 8.2
“Now my mind is undisturbed, and I am quite healthy. If I die immediately, thinking of
Your lotus feet, then I am sure that my performance of Your devotional service will
become perfect.
14. But if Mahārāja Kulaśekhara have to wait for his natural death? BG 8.2
He says then I do not know what will happen, because at that time the bodily functions
will be disrupted, my throat will be choked up, and I do not know whether I shall be
able to chant Your name. Better let me die immediately.”
15. What is the explanation of Lord regarding Brahma and parabrahma? BG 8.3
Brahman is indestructible and eternally existing, and its constitution is not changed at
any time. But beyond Brahman there is Para-brahman. Brahman refers to the living
entity, and Para-brahman refers to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
16. How the constitutional position of the living entity is different from the position he takes in the material
world? BG 8.3
In material consciousness his nature is to try to be the lord of matter, but in spiritual
consciousness, K ṛṣṇ a consciousness, his position is to serve the Supreme.
17. What is called Karma? BG 8.3
When the living entity is in material consciousness, he has to take on various bodies in
the material world. That is called karma, or varied creation by the force of material
consciousness.
18. What is called jīvātmā ? BG 8.3
In Vedic literature the living entity is called jīvātmā and Brahman, but he is never
called Para-brahman.
19. How the living entity (jīvātmā) takes different positions ? BG 8.3
sometimes he merges into the dark material nature and identiﬁes himself with matter,
and sometimes he identiﬁes himself with the superior, spiritual nature. Therefore he is
called the Supreme Lord’s marginal energy.
20. How Jivatma will receives a material or spiritual body? BG 8.3
In material nature he may take a body from any of the 8,400,000 species of life, but in
spiritual nature he has only one body.
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita chapter-8 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/846976 3/1121. according to his karma what are the different forms a living entity will get? BG 8.3
In material nature he is manifested sometimes as a man, demigod, animal, beast, bird,
etc., according to his karma.
22. Which process is called karma? BG 8.3
To attain material heavenly planets and enjoy their facilities a living entity sometimes
performs sacriﬁces (yajña), but when his merit is exhausted he returns to earth again in
the form of a man. This process is called karma.
23. what are The ﬁve kinds of ﬁre ? BG 8.3
The ﬁve kinds of ﬁre are conceived of as the heavenly planets, clouds, the earth, man
and woman
24. What are the ﬁve kinds of sacriﬁcial offerings? BG 8.3
the ﬁve kinds of sacriﬁcial offerings are faith, the enjoyer on the moon, rain, grains and
semen.
25. Why physical nature is called adhibhūta? BG 8.4
Material bodies generally pass through six stages: they are born, they grow, they remain
for some duration, they produce some by-products, they dwindle, and then they vanish.
This physical nature is called adhibhūta.
26. What is called adhidaivata? BG 8.4
The conception of the universal form of the Supreme Lord, which includes all the
demigods and their different planets, is called adhidaivata.
27. Why word eva is particularly important? BG 8.4
The word eva is particularly important in the context of this verse because by this word
the Lord stresses that the Paramātmā is not different from Him.
28. How The neophyte is advised to contemplate the universal form, or virā ṭ -puru ṣ a considered as? BG 8.4
whose legs are considered the lower planets, whose eyes are considered the sun and
moon, and whose head is considered the upper planetary system.
29. How In this verse the importance of K ṛṣṇ a consciousness is stressed
Anyone who quits his body in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness is at once transferred to the
transcendental nature of the Supreme Lord.
30. How is the supreme lord by nature? BG 8.5
The Supreme Lord is the purest of the pure. Therefore anyone who is constantly K ṛṣṇ a
conscious is also the purest of the pure.
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita chapter-8 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/846976 4/1131. Why the word smaran (“remembering”) is important? BG 8.5
Remembrance of K ṛṣṇ a is not possible for the impure soul who has not practiced K ṛṣṇ a
consciousness in devotional service. Therefore one should practice K ṛṣṇ a consciousness
from the very beginning of life.
32. What is the mahā-mantra? BG 8.5
Hare K ṛṣṇ a, Hare K ṛṣṇ a, K ṛṣṇ a K ṛṣṇ a, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma,
Hare Hare.
33. What did Lord Caitanya has advised ? BG 8.5
Lord Caitanya has advised that one be as tolerant as a tree (taror api sahi ṣṇ unā). There
may be so many impediments for a person who is chanting Hare K ṛṣṇ a. Nonetheless,
tolerating all these impediments, one should continue to chant Hare K ṛṣṇ a, Hare
K ṛṣṇa, K ṛṣṇ a K ṛṣṇ a, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare,
34. How at the end of one’s life one can have the full beneﬁt of K ṛṣṇ a consciousness? BG 8.5
one should continue to chant Hare K ṛṣṇ a, Hare K ṛṣṇ a, K ṛṣṇ a K ṛṣṇ a, Hare Hare/ Hare
Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare, so that at the end of one’s life one can have
the full beneﬁt of K ṛṣṇ a consciousness.
35. The process of changing one’s nature at the critical moment of death is here explained. BG 8.6
A person who at the end of his life quits his body thinking of K ṛṣṇ a attains the
transcendental nature of the Supreme Lord, but it is not true that a person who thinks
of something other than K ṛṣṇ a attains the same transcendental state.
36. What happened when Mahārāja Bharata thought of a deer at the end of his life? BG 8.6
so in his next life he was transferred into the body of a deer. Although as a deer he
remembered his past activities, he had to accept that animal body.
37. How will it help one be transferred to the transcendental nature of K ṛṣṇ a? BG 8.6
If in one’s present life one lives in the mode of goodness and always thinks of K ṛṣṇ a, it
is possible for one to remember K ṛṣṇ a at the end of one’s life.
38. How one`s next body will be transcendental (spiritual), not material? 8.6
Remembering K ṛṣṇa at the end of one’s life. That will help one be transferred to the
transcendental nature of K ṛṣṇ a. If one is transcendentally absorbed in K ṛṣṇ a’s service,
then his next body will be transcendental (spiritual), not material.
39. What Lord instruction to Arjuna is very important for all men engaged in material activities? BG 8.7
The Lord does not say that one should give up his prescribed duties or engagements.
One can continue them and at the same time think of K ṛṣṇ a by chanting Hare K ṛṣṇ a.
40. How one will be free from from material contamination? BG 8.7
by chanting Hare K ṛṣṇ a. This will free one from material contamination and engage the
mind and intelligence in K ṛṣṇ a. By chanting K ṛṣṇ a’s names,
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita chapter-8 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/846976 5/1141. What is Puru ṣ am means? BG 8.8
Puru ṣ am means enjoyer
42. What is mystic meditation ? BG 8.8
by chanting the mahā-mantra, Hare K ṛṣṇ a. By this practice of chanting and hearing the
sound vibration of the Supreme Lord, one’s ear, tongue and mind are engaged. This
mystic meditation is very easy to practice, and it helps one attain the Supreme Lord
43. How at the end of our lives we shall have the same bodily constitution as K ṛṣṇ a? BG 8.8
One example often given is that of the caterpillar that thinks of becoming a butterﬂy
and so is transformed into a butterﬂy in the same life. Similarly, if we constantly think
of K ṛṣṇ a, it is certain that at the end of our lives we shall have the same bodily
constitution as K ṛṣṇ a.
44. Why Lord is know as kavi? BG 8.9
The Lord is kavi; that is, He knows past, present and future and therefore knows
everything.
45. Why Lord is the oldest personality? BG 8.9
because He is the origin of everything; everything is born out of Him.
46. Why Lord is called smaller than the smallest? BG 8.9
The living entity is one ten-thousandth part of the tip of a hair, but the Lord is so
inconceivably small that He enters into the heart of this particle. Therefore He is called
smaller than the smallest.
47. How all these planetary systems are sustained? BG 8.9
We often wonder how these big planets are ﬂoating in the air. It is stated here that the
Supreme Lord, by His inconceivable energy, is sustaining all these big planets and
systems of galaxies.
48. Why Lord Krishna is called inconceivable (acintya)? BG 8.9
The word acintya (“inconceivable”) is very signiﬁcant in this connection. God’s energy
is beyond our conception, beyond our thinking jurisdiction, and is therefore called
inconceivable (acintya).
49. What is the meaning of Acintya? BG 8.9
Acintya means that which is beyond this material world
50. What one should do at the time of death? BG 8.10
at the time of death the mind must be ﬁxed in devotion to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. For those practiced in yoga, it is recommended that they raise the life force
between the eyebrows (to the ājñā-cakra).
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita chapter-8 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/846976 6/1151. What is practice of ṣ a ṭ -cakra-yoga? BG 8.10
involving meditation on the six cakras is ṣ a ṭ -cakra-yoga
52. What is the significance of the word yoga-balena? BG 8.10
The particular use of the word yoga-balena is signiﬁcant in this verse because without
practice of yoga – whether ṣ a ṭ -cakra-yoga or bhakti-yoga – one cannot come to this
transcendental state of being at the time of death.
53. How Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇ a has recommended to Arjuna the practice of ṣ a ṭ -cakra-yoga? BG 8.11
in which one places the air of life between the eyebrows.
54. How the syllable o ṁ – is identical with Brahman? BG 8.11
The Lord says that Brahman, although one without a second, has various manifestations
and features. Especially for the impersonalists, the ak ṣ ara, or o ṁ -kāra – the syllable
o ṁ – is identical with Brahman.
55. Which practice is very essential for the student’s advancement in spiritual life? BG 8.11
In the Vedic system of knowledge, students, from the very beginning, are taught to
vibrate o ṁ and learn of the ultimate impersonal Brahman by living with the spiritual
master in complete celibacy. In this way they realize two of Brahman’s features. This
practice is very essential for the student’s advancement in spiritual life
56. Why brahmacārī (unmarried celibate) life is not at all possible? BG 8.11
The social construction of the world has changed so much that there is no possibility of
one’s practicing celibacy from the beginning of student life. Throughout the world
there are many institutions for different departments of knowledge, but there is no
recognized institution where students can be educated in the brahmacārī principles.
57. How one establishes himself in yoga? BG 8.12
The yogic situation is that of detachment from all sensual engagements. Closing all the
doors of the senses and ﬁxing the mind on the heart and the life air at the top of the
head, one establishes himself in yoga.
58. How one will certainly reach the spiritual planets? BG 8.13
After being situated in this yoga practice and vibrating the sacred syllable o ṁ , the
supreme combination of letters, if one thinks of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and quits his body, he will certainly reach the spiritual planets.
59. What is the impersonal sound of K ṛṣṇ a? BG 8.13
The impersonal sound of K ṛṣṇ a is o ṁ ,
60. For the personalists which are the innumerable other planets? BG 8.13
known as Vaiku ṇṭ ha planets, in the spiritual sky, whereas the impersonalists remain in
the brahma-jyotir.
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita chapter-8 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/846976 7/1161. What is the meaning of ananya-cetā ḥ ? BG 8.14
in pure bhakti-yoga the devotee desires nothing but K ṛṣṇ a. A pure devotee does not
desire promotion to heavenly planets, nor does he seek oneness with the brahma-jyotir
or salvation or liberation from material entanglement.
62. Who is called ni ṣ kāma? BG 8.14
which means he has no desire for self-interest. Perfect peace belongs to him alone, not
to them who strive for personal gain. Whereas a jñāna-yogī, karma-yogī or ha ṭ ha-yogī
has his own selﬁsh interests, a perfect devotee has no desire other than to please the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the Lord says that for anyone who is
unﬂinchingly devoted to Him, He is easy to attain.
63. What is the special qualiﬁcation of the pure devotee? BG 8.14
The special qualiﬁcation of the pure devotee is that he is always thinking of K ṛṣṇ a
without deviation and without considering the time or place. There should be no
impediments. He should be able to carry out his service anywhere and at any time.
64. How can a devotee create the atmosphere of V ṛ ndāvana? BG 8.14
a pure devotee can live anywhere and create the atmosphere of V ṛ ndāvana by his
devotional service. It was Śrī Advaita who told Lord Caitanya, “Wherever You are, O
Lord – there is V ṛ ndāvana.”
65. What are the words satatam and nityaśa ḥ means? BG 8.14
which mean “always,” “regularly,” or “every day,” a pure devotee constantly
remembers K ṛṣṇ a and meditates upon Him. These are qualiﬁcations of the pure
devotee, for whom the Lord is most easily attainable.
66. How many different ways bhakti-yogīs are engaged in? BG 8.14
A. 4 B. 5 
C. 3 D. 8
67. What is śānta-bhakta means? Bg 8.14
Who is engaged in devotional service in neutrality
68. What is dāsya-bhakta meaning? BG 8.14
Who is engaged in devotional service as servant.
69. What is sakhya-bhakta meaning? BG 8.14
Who is engaged as friend
70. Who is vātsalya-bhakta is? BG 8.14
Who is engaged as parent.
71. Who is mādhurya-bhakta? BG 8.14
Who is engaged as conjugal lover of the Supreme Lord
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita chapter-8 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/846976 8/1172. What is the great blessing of the K ṛṣṇ a conscious process of chanting the mahā-mantra ? BG 8.14
A pure devotee cannot forget the Supreme Lord for a moment, and similarly the
Supreme Lord cannot forget His pure devotee for a moment. This is the great blessing
of the K ṛṣṇ a conscious process of chanting the mahā-mantra
73. How the supreme planet is described in Vedic literature as ? BG 8.15
The supreme planet is described in Vedic literature as avyakta and ak ṣ ara and paramā
gati; in other words, that planet is beyond our material vision, and it is inexplicable,
but it is the highest goal,
74. What is the destination for the mahātmās (great souls)? BG 8.15
The mahātmās receive transcendental messages from the realized devotees and thus
gradually develop devotional service in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness and become so absorbed in
transcendental service that they no longer desire elevation to any of the material
planets, nor do they even want to be transferred to any spiritual planet. They only
want K ṛṣṇ a and K ṛṣṇ a’s association, and nothing else.
75. Who are the supreme souls? BG 8.15
This verse speciﬁcally mentions the personalist devotees of the Supreme Lord, K ṛṣṇ a.
These devotees in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness achieve the highest perfection of life. In other
words, they are the supreme souls.
76. Who are all fall down to earth? BG 8.16
people on higher planets such as Brahmaloka, Candraloka and Indraloka fall down to
earth.
77. How to achieve Brahmaloka? BG 8.16
The practice of sacriﬁce called pañcāgni-vidyā, recommended in the Chāndogya
Upani ṣ ad, enables one to achieve Brahmaloka,
78. How after reaching Brahma loka one must return to earth? Bg 8.16
but if, on Brahmaloka, one does not cultivate K ṛṣṇ a consciousness, then he must return
to earth.
79. How one at the time of universal devastation are transferred to the eternal spiritual kingdom? BG 8.16
Those who progress in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness on the higher planets are gradually elevated
to higher and higher planets and at the time of universal devastation are transferred to
the eternal spiritual kingdom.
80. What is the cycles of kalpas? BG 8.17
The duration of the material universe is limited. It is manifested in cycles of kalpas. A
kalpa is a day of Brahmā,
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita chapter-8 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/846976 9/1181. How one day of Brahmā consists of? Bg 8.17
one day of Brahmā consists of a thousand cycles of four yugas, or ages: Satya, Tretā,
Dvāpara and Kali.
82. How long Brahmā lives? BG 8.17
These four yugas, rotating a thousand times, comprise one day of Brahmā, and the
same number comprise one night. Brahmā lives one hundred of such “years” and then
dies.
83. which is the highest planet in the material universe ? BG 8.17
Brahmaloka, which is the highest planet in the material universe and which survives all
the heavenly planets in the upper strata of the planetary system,
84. Who will be promoted to Brahmā’s particular planet, Brahmaloka? BG 8.17
Elevated sannyāsīs are promoted to Brahmā’s particular planet, Brahmaloka
85. How one become manifest from the unmanifest state and unmanifest again? BG 8.18
At the beginning of Brahmā’s day, all living entities become manifest from the
unmanifest state, and thereafter, when the night falls, they are merged into the
unmanifest again.
86. How less intelligent person captivated by the spell of the material world? BG 8.18
during the day they become manifest, and at night they are annihilated again.
Ultimately, when Brahmā’s life is ﬁnished, they are all annihilated and remain
unmanifest for millions and millions of years. And when Brahmā is born again in another
millennium they are again manifest. In this way they are captivated by the spell of the
material world.
87. Which is the place where all desires are fulﬁlled? BG 8.21
The supreme abode of the Personality of Godhead, K ṛṣṇ a, is described in the Brahma-
sa ṁhitā as cintāma ṇ i-dhāma, a place where all desires are fulﬁlled.
88. Which place is made of touchstone? BG 8.21
The supreme abode of Lord K ṛṣṇ a, known as Goloka V ṛ ndāvana, is full of palaces made
of touchstone.
89. How desire trees will work? Bg 8.21
There are also trees, called “desire trees,” that supply any type of eatable upon
demand,
90. How surabhi cows are in nature? Bg 8.21
there are cows, known as surabhi cows, which supply a limitless supply of milk
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita chapter-8 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/846976 10/1191. What is the replica of Goloka V ṛ ndāvana? BG 8.21
On this earth, V ṛ ndāvana, ninety miles southeast of Delhi, is a replica of that supreme
Goloka V ṛ ndāvana located in the spiritual sky.
92. what is stated in the Vedas about Goloka V ṛ ndāvana? BG 8.22
the Lord is always in the supreme abode, Goloka V ṛ ndāvana, He is all-pervading, so that
everything is going on nicely (goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūta ḥ ). As stated in the
Vedas
93. How Lord energy works even he is far away? BG 8.22
His energies are so expansive that they systematically conduct everything in the cosmic
manifestation without a ﬂaw, although the Supreme Lord is far, far away.
94. How is unalloyed devotees of the Supreme Lord? BG 8.23
who are totally surrendered souls, do not care when they leave their bodies or by what
method. They leave everything in K ṛṣṇ a’s hands and so easily and happily return to
Godhead.
95. who are not unalloyed devotees? BG 8.23
those who are not unalloyed devotees and who depend instead on such methods of
spiritual realization as karma-yoga, jñāna-yoga and ha ṭ ha-yoga must leave the body at a
suitable time in order to be sure of whether or not they will return to the world of birth
and death.
96. Who can decide time and place to leave the body? BG 8.24
Mystics who are advanced in yoga practice can arrange the time and place to leave the
body
97. What Kapila Muni mentions about death? BG 8.25
Kapila Muni mentions that those who are expert in fruitive activities and sacriﬁcial
methods on earth attain to the moon at death.
98. How long they will stay their? BG 8.25
These elevated souls live on the moon for about 10,000 years (by demigod calculations)
and enjoy life by drinking soma-rasa. They eventually return to earth.
99. According to Vedic opinion how many ways of passing from this world? BG 8.26
there are two ways of passing from this world
100. explain the 2 way of passing from this world? BG 8.26
one in light and one in darkness. When one passes in light, he does not come back; but
when one passes in darkness, he returns.
9/21/2018 Bhagavadgita chapter-8 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/846976 11/11101. What is the word yoga-yukta signifies this verse? BG 8.27
The best way to be absorbed in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness is to be always dovetailed in His
service, and this will make one’s path to the spiritual kingdom safe, certain and direct.
The word yoga-yukta is especially signiﬁcant in this verse.
102. What is yukta-vairāgya? BG 8.27
one attains perfection
