“Bhagavad-gita As It Is ” by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of
this book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended forpersonal non-commercial use only, under the “fair use” guidelinesestablished by international copyright laws. You may use thiselectronic file to evaluate the printed version of this book, for yourown private use, or for short excerpts used in academic works,research, student papers, presentations, and the like. You candistribute this evaluation copy to others over the Internet, so long asyou keep this copyright information intact. You may not reproduce morethan ten percent (10%) of this book in any media without the expresswritten permission from the copyright holders. Reference any excerptsin the following way: “Excerpted from “Bhagavad-gita As It Is” by A.C.Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta BookTrust International, www.Krishna.com .”
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1972-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or toevaluate dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website ofthe publishers, www.Krishna.com .
Bhagavad-gita
As It Is
COMPLETE EDITION
with original Sanskrit text (in the printed version)
Roman transliteration, English equivalents,
translation and elaborate purports
by
His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada
Founder-Acarya of the Hare Krishna Movement
Original 1972 edition with some corrections to obvious
typographical errors and missing references added
Foreword
by Professor Edward C. Dimock Jr.The Bhagavad-gita is the best known and the most frequently translated
of Vedic religious texts. Why it should be so appealing to the Westernmind is an interesting question. It has drama, for its setting is ascene of two great armies, banners flying, drawn up opposite oneanother on the field, poised for battle. It has ambiguity, and the factthat Arjuna and his charioteer Krsna are carrying on their dialougebetween the two armies suggests the indecision of Arjuna about thebasic question; should he enter battle against and kill those who arefriends and kinsmen? It has mystery, as Krsna demonstrates to Arjuna
His cosmic form, It has a properly complicated view of the ways of the
religious life and treats of the paths of knowledge, works, disciplineand faith and their inter-relationships, problems that have botheredadherents of other religions in other times and places. The devotionspoken of is a deliberate means of religious satisfaction, not a mereoutpouring of poetic emotion. Next to the Bhagavata-purana, a long workfrom South India, the Gita is the text most frequently quoted in thephilosophical writings of the Gaudiya Vaisnava school, the schoolrepresented by Swami Bhaktivedanta as the latest in a long successionof teachers. It can be said that this school of Vaisnavism was founded,or revived, by Sri Krsna-Caitanya Mahaprabhu (1486-1533) in Bengal, andthat it is currently the strongest single religious force in theeastern part of the Indian subcontinent. The Gaudiya Vaisnava school,for whom Krsna is Himself the Supreme God, and not merely anincarnation of another deity, sees bhakti as an immediate and powerfulreligious force, consisting of love between man and God. Its disciplineconsists of devoting all one's actions to the Deity, and one listens tothe stories of Krsna from the sacred texts, one chants Krsna's name,washes, bathes and dresses the murti of Krsna, feeds Him and takes theremains of food offered to Him, thus absorbing His grace; one doesthese things and many more, until one has been changed: the devotee hasbecome transformed into one close to Krsna, and sees the Lord face toface.
Swami Bhaktivedanta comments upon the Gita from this point of view, and
that is legitimate. More than that, in this translation the Westernreader has the unique opportunity of seeing how a Krsna devoteeinterprets his own texts. It is the Vedic exegetical tradition, justlyfamous, in action. This book is then a welcome addition from manypoints of view. It can serve as a valuable textbook for the collegestudent. It allows us to listen to a skilled interpreter explicating atext which has profound religious meaning. It gives us insights intothe original and highly convincing ideas of the Gaudiya Vaisnavaschool. In providing the Sanskrit in both Devanagari andtransliteration, it offers the Sanskrit specialist the opportunity tore-interpret, or debate particular Sanskrit meanings--although I thinkthere will be little disagreement about the quality of the Swami'sSanskrit scholarship. And finally, for the nonspecialist, there isreadable English and a devotional attitude which cannot help but movethe sensitive reader. And there are the paintings, which, incredibly asit may seem to those familiar with contemporary Indian religious art,were done by American devotees.
The scholar, the student of Gayudiya Vaisnavism, and the increasing
number of Western readers interested in classical Vedic thought havebeen done a service by Swami Bhaktivedanta. By bringing us a new andliving interpretation of a text already known to many, he has increasedour understanding manyfold; and arguments for understanding, in thesedays of estrangement, need not be made.
Professor Edward C. Dimock, Jr.
Department of South Asian Languages and Civilization
University of Chicago
To
SRILA BALADEVA VIDYABHUSANA
who presented so nicely
the "Govinda-bhasya" commentary
on
Vedanta philosophy
Preface
Originally I wrote Bhagavad-gita As It Is in the form in which it is
presented now. When this book was first published, the originalmanuscript was, unfortunately, cut short to less than 400 pages,without illustrations and without explanations for most of the originalverses of the Srimad Bhagavad-gita. In all of my other books--Srimad-Bhagavatam, Sri Isopanisad, etc.--the system is that I give theoriginal verse, its English transliteration, word-for-word Sanskrit-English equivalents, translations and purports. This makes the bookvery authentic and scholarly and makes the meaning self-evident. I wasnot very happy, therefore, when I had to minimize my originalmanuscript. But later on, when the demand for Bhagavad-gita As It Isconsiderably increased, I was requested by many scholars and devoteesto present the book in its original form, and Messrs. Macmillan and Co.agreed to publish the complete edition. Thus the present attempt is tooffer the original manuscript of this great book of knowledge with fullparampara explanation in order to establish the Krsna consciousnessmovement more soundly and progressively.
Our Krsna consciousness movement is genuine, historically authorized,
natural and transcendental due to its being based on Bhagavad-gita AsIt Is. It is gradually becoming the most popular movement in the entireworld, especially amongst the younger generation. It is becoming moreand more interesting to the older generation also. Older gentlemen arebecoming interested, so much so that the fathers and grandfathers of mydisciples are encouraging us by becoming life members of our greatsociety, the International Society for Krishna Consciousness. In LosAngeles many fathers and mothers used to come to see me to expresstheir feelings of gratitude for my leading the Krsna consciousnessmovement throughout the entire world. Some of them said that it isgreatly fortunate for the Americans that I have started the Krsnaconsciousness movement in America. But actually the original father ofthis movement is Lord Krsna Himself, since it was started a very longtime ago but is coming down to human society by disciplic succession.If I have any credit in this connection, it does not belong to mepersonally, but it is due to my eternal spiritual master, His DivineGrace Om Visnupada Paramahamsa Parivrajakacarya 108 Sri SrimadBhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami Maharaja Prabhupada.
If personally I have any credit in this matter, it is only that I have
tried to present Bhagavad-gita as it is, without adulteration. Beforemy presentation of Bhagavad-gita As It Is, almost all the Englisheditions of Bhagavad-gita were introduced to fulfill someone's personalambition. But our attempt, in presenting Bhagavad-gita As It Is, is topresent the mission of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. Ourbusiness is to present the will of Krsna, not that of any mundanespeculator like the politician, philosopher or scientist, for they havevery little knowledge of Krsna, despite all their other knowledge. WhenKrsna says, man-mana bhava mad-bhakto mad-yaji mam namaskuru, etc., we,unlike the so-called scholars, do not say that Krsna and His innerspirit are different. Krsna is absolute, and there is no differencebetween Krsna's name, Krsna's form, Krsna's qualities, Krsna'spastimes, etc. This absolute position of Krsna is difficult tounderstand for any person who is not a devotee of Krsna in theparampara (disciplic succession). Generally the so-called scholars,politicians, philosophers, and svamis, without perfect knowledge ofKrsna, try to banish or kill Krsna when writing commentary on Bhagavad-
gita. Such unauthorized commentary upon Bhagavad-gita is known as
Mayavada-bhasya, and Lord Caitanya has warned us about theseunauthorized men. Lord Caitanya clearly says that anyone who tries tounderstand Bhagavad-gita from the Mayavadi point of view will commit agreat blunder. The result of such a blunder will be that the misguidedstudent of Bhagavad-gita will certainly be bewildered on the path ofspiritual guidance and will not be able to go back to home, back toGodhead.
Our only purpose is to present this Bhagavad-gita As It Is in order to
guide the conditioned student to the same purpose for which Krsnadescends to this planet once in a day of Brahma, or every 8,600,000,000years. This purpose is stated in Bhagavad-gita, and we have to acceptit as it is; otherwise there is no point in trying to understand theBhagavad-gita and its speaker, Lord Krsna. Lord Krsna first spokeBhagavad-gita to the sun-god some hundreds of millions of years ago. Wehave to accept this fact and thus understand the historicalsignificance of Bhagavad-gita, without misinterpretation, on theauthority of Krsna. To interpret Bhagavad-gita without any reference tothe will of Krsna is the greatest offense. In order to save oneselffrom this offense, one has to understand the Lord as the SupremePersonality of Godhead, as He was directly understood by Arjuna, LordKrsna's first disciple. Such understanding of Bhagavad-gita is reallyprofitable and authorized for the welfare of human society infulfilling the mission of life.
The Krsna consciousness movement is essential in human society, for it
offers the highest perfection of life. How this is so is explainedfully in the Bhagavad-gita. Unfortunately, mundane wranglers have takenadvantage of Bhagavad-gita to push forward their demonic propensitiesand mislead people regarding right understanding of the simpleprinciples of life. Everyone should know how God, or Krsna, is great,and everyone should know the factual position of the living entities.Everyone should know that a living entity is eternally a servant andthat unless one serves Krsna one has to serve illusion in differentvarieties of the three modes of material nature, and thus perpetuallyone has to wander within the cycle of birth and death; even the so-called liberated Mayavadi speculator has to undergo this process. Thisknowledge constitutes a great science, and each and every living beinghas to hear it for his own interest.
People in general, especially in this Age of Kali, are enamored by the
external energy of Krsna, and they wrongly think that by advancement ofmaterial comforts every man will be happy. They have no knowledge thatthe material or external nature is very strong, for everyone isstrongly bound by the stringent laws of material nature. A livingentity is happily the part and parcel of the Lord, and thus his naturalfunction is to render immediate service to the Lord. By the spell ofillusion one tries to be happy by serving his personal sensegratification in different forms which will never make him happy.Instead of satisfying his own personal material senses, he has tosatisfy the senses of the Lord. That is the highest perfection of life.The Lord wants this, and He demands it. One has to understand thiscentral point of Bhagavad-gita. Our Krsna consciousness movement isteaching the whole world this central point, and because we are notpolluting the theme of Bhagavad-gita As It Is, anyone seriouslyinterested in deriving benefit by studying the Bhagavad-gita must takehelp from the Krsna consciousness movement for practical understanding
of Bhagavad-gita under the direct guidance of the Lord. We hope,
therefore, that people will derive the greatest benefit by studyingBhagavad-gita As It Is as we have presented it here, and if even oneman becomes a pure devotee of the Lord, we shall consider our attempt asuccess.
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
12 May, 1971
Sydney, Australia
