9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita Chapter-10 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/855274 1/14Name: ___________________________________________ Date: ___________________
Bhagavad-gita Chapter-10
1. Explain The word bhagavān one who is full in six opulences? BG 10.1
who has full strength, full fame, wealth, knowledge, beauty and renunciation, is
Bhagavān, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead. While K ṛṣṇ a was present on this
earth, He displayed all six opulences. Therefore great sages like Parāśara Muni have all
accepted K ṛṣṇ a as the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
2. Who cannot take part in devotional discourses? BG 10.1
One should always hear about the Lord in the association of devotees; that will enhance
one’s devotional service. Discourses in the society of devotees can take place only
among those who are really anxious to be in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness. Others cannot take
part in such discourses.
3. Who have failed to understand Krishna? BG 10.2
Even the demigods and the great sages have tried to understand K ṛṣṇ a by their mental
speculation, and they have failed to do so.
4. if anyone wants to know the Absolute Truth what they should do? BG 10.2
Here the Lord indirectly says that if anyone wants to know the Absolute Truth, “Here I
am present as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. I am the Supreme.” One should
know this. Although one cannot understand the inconceivable Lord who is personally
present, He nonetheless exists.
5. Who is superior to millions and millions of ordinary men? BG 10.3
those who are trying to elevate themselves to the platform of spiritual realization are
not ordinary men; they are superior to millions and millions of ordinary men who have
no knowledge of spiritual realization.
6. Who is the most successful spiritually realized person? BG 10.3
one who can come to the understanding that K ṛṣṇ a is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the proprietor of everything, the unborn, is the most successful spiritually
realized person.
7. What is the words vetti loka-maheśvaram indicate ? BG 10.3
the words vetti loka-maheśvaram indicate that one should know that Lord K ṛṣṇ a is the
supreme proprietor of the planetary systems of the universe. He was existing before the
creation, and He is different from His creation.
8. How K ṛṣṇ a is different even from the great demigods like Brahmā and Śiva? BG 10.3
All the demigods were created within this material world, but as far as K ṛṣṇ a is
concerned, it is said that He is not created; therefore K ṛṣṇ a is different even from the
great demigods like Brahmā and Śiva.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita Chapter-10 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/855274 2/149. Why Lord Krishna Supreme Person of all planets? BG 10.3
K ṛṣṇa is different even from the great demigods like Brahmā and Śiva. And because He
is the creator of Brahmā, Śiva and all the other demigods, He is the Supreme Person of
all planets.
10. Who can immediately becomes liberated from all sinful reactions? BG 10.3
Śrī K ṛṣṇ a is therefore different from everything that is created, and anyone who knows
Him as such immediately becomes liberated from all sinful reactions.
11. If K ṛṣṇ a is known as the son of Devakī, then how can He be unborn?BG 10.3
That is also explained in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: When He appeared before Devakī and
Vasudeva, He was not born as an ordinary child; He appeared in His original form, and
then He transformed Himself into an ordinary child.
12. What is Intelligence refers to? BG 10.4-5
Intelligence refers to the power to analyze things in their proper perspective
13. What is knowledge refers to ? BG 10.3
knowledge refers to understanding what is spirit and what is matter. Ordinary
knowledge obtained by a university education pertains only to matter, and it is not
accepted here as knowledge. Knowledge means knowing the distinction between spirit
and matter. In modern education there is no knowledge about spirit
14. Why academic knowledge is not complete? BG 10.4-5
In modern education there is no knowledge about spirit; they are simply taking care of
the material elements and bodily needs. Therefore academic knowledge is not
complete.
15. What is Asammoha? BG 10.4-5
Asammoha, freedom from doubt and delusion, can be achieved when one is not hesitant
and when he understands the transcendental philosophy. Slowly but surely he becomes
free from bewilderment. Nothing should be accepted blindly; everything should be
accepted with care and with caution
16. What is K ṣamā? BG 10.4-5
K ṣamā, tolerance and forgiveness, should be practiced; one should be tolerant and
excuse the minor offenses of others
17. What is Satyam, truthfulness, means ? BG 10.4-5
Satyam, truthfulness, means that facts should be presented as they are, for the beneﬁt
of others. Facts should not be misrepresented. According to social conventions, it is
said that one can speak the truth only when it is palatable to others. But that is not
truthfulness. The truth should be spoken in a straightforward way, so that others will
understand actually what the facts are.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita Chapter-10 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/855274 3/1418. What is called sama? BG 10.4-5
one should restrain the mind from unnecessary thoughts; that is called śama
19. What is Sukham, pleasure or happiness? BG 10.4-5
Sukham, pleasure or happiness, should always be in that which is favorable for the
cultivation of the spiritual knowledge of K ṛṣṇ a consciousness. And similarly, that which
is painful or which causes distress is that which is unfavorable for the cultivation of
K ṛṣṇa consciousness.
20. What should be accepted or rejected? B 10-4-5
Anything favorable for the development of K ṛṣṇ a consciousness should be accepted,
and anything unfavorable should be rejected.
21. For whom Abhayam, fearlessness, is possible ? BG 10.4-5
Abhayam, fearlessness, is possible only for one in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness.
22. What is Ahi ṁ sā means? BG 10.4-5
Ahi ṁ sā means that people should be trained in such a way that the full utilization of
the human body can be achieved. The human body is meant for spiritual realization, so
any movement or any commissions which do not further that end commit violence on
the human body. That which furthers the future spiritual happiness of the people in
general is called nonviolence.
23. What is Samatā, equanimity, refers to? BG 10.4-5
That which is favorable for prosecuting K ṛṣṇ a consciousness should be accepted; that
which is unfavorable should be rejected. That is called samatā, equanimity. A person in
K ṛṣṇa consciousness has nothing to reject and nothing to accept save in terms of its
usefulness in the prosecution of K ṛṣṇ a consciousness.
24. What is Tu ṣṭ i, satisfaction, means? BG 10.4-5
Tu ṣṭi, satisfaction, means that one should not be eager to gather more and more
material goods by unnecessary activity. One should be satisﬁed with whatever is
obtained by the grace of the Supreme Lord; that is called satisfaction.
25. What is Tapas means? BG 10.4-5
Tapas means austerity or penance. There are many rules and regulations in the Vedas
which apply here, like rising early in the morning and taking a bath. Sometimes it is
very troublesome to rise early in the morning, but whatever voluntary trouble one may
suffer in this way is called penance.
26. What are prescriptions for fasting on certain days of the month? BG 10.4-5
One may not be inclined to practice such fasting, but because of his determination to
make advancement in the science of K ṛṣṇ a consciousness, he should accept such bodily
troubles when they are recommended. However, one should not fast unnecessarily or
against Vedic injunctions. One should not fast for some political purpose
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita Chapter-10 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/855274 4/1427. How one enriches in spiritual knowledge? BG 10.4-5
in Bhagavad-gītā as fasting in ignorance, and anything done in ignorance or passion does
not lead to spiritual advancement. Everything done in the mode of goodness does
advance one, however, and fasting done in terms of the Vedic injunctions enriches one
in spiritual knowledge.
28. How much one should give for charity? BG 10.4-5
As far as charity is concerned, one should give ﬁfty percent of his earnings to some
good cause.
29. what is a good cause? BG 10.4-5
It is that which is conducted in terms of K ṛṣṇ a consciousness. That is not only a good
cause, but the best cause. Because K ṛṣṇ a is good, His cause is also good. Thus charity
should be given to a person who is engaged in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness. According to the
Vedic literature, it is enjoined that charity should be given to the brāhma ṇ as.
30. Why charity should be given to the brāhma ṇ as? BG 10.4-5
A brāhma ṇ a is supposed to devote his whole life to understanding Brahman. Brahma
jānātīti brāhma ṇ a ḥ : one who knows Brahman is called a brāhma ṇ a. Thus charity is
offered to the brāhma ṇ as because they are always engaged in higher spiritual service
and have no time to earn their livelihood.
31. What is the business of the sannyāsīs? BG 10.4-5
The sannyāsīs beg from door to door, not for money but for missionary purposes. The
system is that they go from door to door to awaken the householders from the slumber
of ignorance. Because the householders are engaged in family affairs and have
forgotten their actual purpose in life – awakening their K ṛṣṇ a consciousness – it is the
business of the sannyāsīs to go as beggars to the householders and encourage them to
be K ṛṣṇ a conscious.
32. who is known as Hira ṇ yagarbha? BG 10.6
The Lord is giving a genealogical synopsis of the universal population. Brahmā is the
original creature born out of the energy of the Supreme Lord, who is known as
Hira ṇ yagarbha.
33. Which sages are known as the patriarchs of the living entities all over the universe? BG 10.6
Brahma born from energy of Lord Krishna and from Brahmā all the seven great sages,
and before them four other great sages, named Sanaka, Sananda, Sanātana and Sanat-
kumāra, and the fourteen Manus, are manifested. All these twenty-ﬁve great sages are
known as the patriarchs of the living entities all over the universe.
34. How in other Planet and Universe population born? BG 10.6
There are innumerable universes and innumerable planets within each universe, and
each planet is full of population of different varieties. All of them are born of these
twenty-ﬁve patriarchs.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita Chapter-10 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/855274 5/1435. How long Brahmā underwent penance? BG 10.6
Brahmā underwent penance for one thousand years of the demigods before he realized
by the grace of K ṛṣṇ a how to create
36. How brāhma ṇ as and k ṣ atriyas are born? BG 10.6
from Brahmā came Sanaka, Sananda, Sanātana and Sanat-kumāra, then Rudra, and then
the seven sages, and in this way all the brāhma ṇ as and k ṣ atriyas are born out of the
energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
37. Who is known as Pitāmaha? BG 10.6
Brahmā is known as Pitāmaha, the grandfather,
38. Who is known as Prapitāmaha? BG 10.6
K ṛṣṇa is known as Prapitāmaha, the father of the grandfather.
39. How one becomes a surrendered soul and engages himself in the devotional service of the Lord? BG 10.7
If one knows factually how God is great, then naturally he becomes a surrendered soul
and engages himself in the devotional service of the Lord. When one factually knows
the opulences of the Supreme, there is no alternative but to surrender to Him.
40. What All Vedic literature agrees to? BG 10.8
All Vedic literature agrees that K ṛṣṇ a is the source of Brahmā, Śiva and all other
demigods.
41. How Nārāya ṇ a is an expansion of K ṛṣṇ a? BG 10.8
Because From Nārāya ṇ a, Brahmā is born, and from Nārāya ṇ a the patriarchs are also
born. From Nārāya ṇ a, Indra is born, from Nārāya ṇ a the eight Vasus are born, from
Nārāya ṇ a the eleven Rudras are born, from Nārāya ṇ a the twelve Ādityas are born.”
This Nārāya ṇ a is an expansion of K ṛṣṇ a.
42. How the Pure devotees? BG 10.9
Pure devotees, whose characteristics are mentioned here, engage themselves fully in
the transcendental loving service of the Lord. Their minds cannot be diverted from the
lotus feet of K ṛṣṇ a. Their talks are solely on the transcendental subjects.
43. What are The symptoms of the pure devotees? BG 10.9
The symptoms of the pure devotees are described in this verse speciﬁcally. Devotees of
the Supreme Lord are twenty-four hours daily engaged in glorifying the qualities and
pastimes of the Supreme Lord. Their hearts and souls are constantly submerged in
K ṛṣṇa, and they take pleasure in discussing Him with other devotees.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita Chapter-10 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/855274 6/1444. What is Buddhi-yoga means? BG 10.10
Buddhi means intelligence, and yoga means mystic activities or mystic elevation. When
one tries to go back home, back to Godhead, and takes fully to K ṛṣṇ a consciousness in
devotional service, his action is called buddhi-yoga. In other words, buddhi-yoga is the
process by which one gets out of the entanglement of this material world. The ultimate
goal of progress is K ṛṣṇ a
45. Explain Karma-yoga, Jnana-yoga and Bhakti-yoga? BG 10.10
When a person knows the goal of life but is addicted to the fruits of activities, he is
acting in karma-yoga. When he knows that the goal is K ṛṣṇ a but he takes pleasure in
mental speculations to understand K ṛṣṇ a, he is acting in jñāna-yoga. And when he
knows the goal and seeks K ṛṣṇ a completely in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness and devotional
service, he is acting in bhakti-yoga, or buddhi-yoga, which is the complete yoga.
46. How a non intelligent person make progress if he is devotee of Krishna? BG 10.10
A person may have a bona ﬁde spiritual master and may be attached to a spiritual
organization, but if he is still not intelligent enough to make progress, then K ṛṣṇ a from
within gives him instructions so that he may ultimately come to Him without difﬁculty.
47. How one is elevated to the platform of pure knowledge? BG 10.11
Due to the contamination of material association, through many, many millions of
births, one’s heart is always covered with the dust of materialism, but when one
engages in devotional service and constantly chants Hare K ṛṣṇ a, the dust quickly clears,
and one is elevated to the platform of pure knowledge
48. What Arjuna is conﬁrmed by Vedic injunction? BG 10.12-13
Arjuna is accepting Lord as the Supreme Truth, in concordance with the Vedic
injunction. It is not that because K ṛṣṇ a is Arjuna’s intimate friend Arjuna is ﬂattering
Him by calling Him the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth. Whatever
Arjuna says in these two verses is conﬁrmed by Vedic truth. Vedic injunctions afﬁrm
that only one who takes to devotional service to the Supreme Lord can understand Him
49. What is smara ṇ am means? BG 10.12-13
constant thinking of K ṛṣṇ a is smara ṇ am,
50. Who cannot understand K ṛṣṇ ? BG 10.14
Arjuna herein conﬁrms that persons of faithless and demonic nature cannot understand
K ṛṣṇa.
51. How can we understand that K ṛṣṇ a is the Supreme Personality of Godhead? BG 10.14
When the paramparā system was lost, Arjuna was selected to rejuvenate it. The
acceptance by Arjuna of all that K ṛṣṇ a says should be emulated; then we can
understand the essence of Bhagavad-gītā, and then only can we understand that K ṛṣṇ a
is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita Chapter-10 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/855274 7/1452. Why Arjuna addresses Lord Krishna as Bhūta-bhāvana? BG 10.15
Yet one still may not understand that K ṛṣṇ a is the father of all living entities. Therefore
Arjuna addresses Him as Bhūta-bhāvana
53. Why Arjuna addresses Krishna as Bhūteśa? BG 10.15
if one comes to know Him as the father of all the living entities, still one may not know
Him as the supreme controller; therefore He is addressed here as Bhūteśa, the supreme
controller of everyone.
54. Why Arjuna Address Krishna as Deva-deva? BG 10.15
even if one knows K ṛṣṇ a as the supreme controller of all living entities, still one may
not know that He is the origin of all the demigods; therefore He is addressed herein as
Deva-deva, the worshipful God of all demigods.
55. Why Arjuna addressed Krishna as Jagat-pati? Bg 10.15
even if one knows Him as the worshipful God of all demigods, one may not know that
He is the supreme proprietor of everything; therefore He is addressed as Jagat-pati.
Thus the truth about K ṛṣṇ a is established in this verse by the realization of Arjuna, and
we should follow in the footsteps of Arjuna to understand K ṛṣṇ a as He is
56. Why Arjuna is asking K ṛṣṇ a to explain His all-pervading nature? BG 10.16
People in general and the impersonalists in particular concern themselves mainly with
the all-pervading nature of the Supreme. So Arjuna is asking K ṛṣṇ a how He exists in His
all-pervading aspect through His different energies. One should know that this is being
asked by Arjuna on behalf of the common people.
57. Why Arjuna addresses K ṛṣṇ a speciﬁcally as yogin? BG 10.17
because Śrī K ṛṣṇ a is the master of the yoga-māyā energy, by which He is covered and
uncovered to the common man. The common man who has no love for K ṛṣṇ a cannot
always think of K ṛṣṇ a; therefore he has to think materially
58. What vibhūti indicates? Bg 10.19
vibhūti indicates an exceptional opulence.
59. Why Krishna agrees to state only the principal manifestations of His different energies? BG 10.19
The word prādhānyata ḥ (“principal”) is very important because we can understand only
a few of the principal details of the Supreme Lord, for His features are unlimited. It is
not possible to understand them all. And vibhūti, as used in this verse, refers to the
opulences by which He controls the whole manifestation.
60. Why Arjuna is addressed as Gu ḍ ākeśa? BG 10.20
which means “one who has conquered the darkness of sleep.” For those who are
sleeping in the darkness of ignorance, it is not possible to understand how the Supreme
Personality of Godhead manifests Himself in various ways in the material and spiritual
worlds.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita Chapter-10 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/855274 8/1461. Wha K ṛṣṇ a ﬁrst informs Arjuna ? BG 10.20
that He is the soul of the entire cosmic manifestation by dint of His primary expansion.
Before the material creation, the Supreme Lord, by His plenary expansion, accepts the
puru ṣ a incarnation, and from Him everything begins. Therefore He is ātmā, the soul of
the mahat-tattva, the universal elements
62. What are the three puru ṣ a-avatāras of Lord Krishna? BG 10.20
Kāra ṇ odaka-śāyī Vi ṣṇ u, Garbhodaka-śāyī Vi ṣṇ u and K ṣ īrodaka-śāyī Vi ṣṇ u
63. How many Adhitya` s are there and who is the principal? BG 10.21
There are twelve Ādityas, of which K ṛṣṇ a is the principal. Among all the luminaries
shining in the sky
64. How many varieties of wind blowing in space? BG 10.21
There are ﬁfty varieties of wind blowing in space, and of these winds the controlling
deity, Marīci, represents K ṛṣṇ a.
65. Among the stars who is more prominent in sky? BG 10.21
Among the stars, the moon is the most prominent at night, and thus the moon
represents K ṛṣṇ a. It appears from this verse that the moon is one of the stars;
therefore the stars that twinkle in the sky also reﬂect the light of the sun
66. What is the difference between matter and spirit? BG 10.22
The difference between matter and spirit is that matter has no consciousness like the
living entity; therefore this consciousness is supreme and eternal. Consciousness cannot
be produced by a combination of matter
67. Who is Lord Śiva? BG 10.23
There are eleven Rudras, of whom Śa ṅ kara, Lord Śiva, is predominant. He is the
incarnation of the Supreme Lord
68. Who is leader of the Yak ṣ as and Rāk ṣ asas? BG 10.23
The leader of the Yak ṣ as and Rāk ṣ asas is Kuvera, the master treasurer of the demigods,
and he is a representation of the Supreme Lord
69. Which mountain famed for its rich natural resources? BG 10.23
Meru is a mountain famed for its rich natural resources.
70. What are the representations of K ṛṣṇ a only give hints of His greatness? BG 10.24
Indra is the chief demigod of the heavenly planets and is known as the king of the
heavens. The planet on which he reigns is called Indraloka. B ṛ haspati is Indra’s priest,
and since Indra is the chief of all kings, B ṛ haspati is the chief of all priests. And as Indra
is the chief of all kings, similarly Skanda, or Kārttikeya, the son of Pārvatī and Lord
Śiva, is the chief of all military commanders. And of all bodies of water, the ocean is
the greatest. These representations of K ṛṣṇ a only give hints of His greatness.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita Chapter-10 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/855274 9/1471. Who is the most powerful sage? BG 10.25
Brahmā, the ﬁrst living creature within the universe, created several sons for the
propagation of various kinds of species. Among these sons, Bh ṛ gu is the most powerful
sage
72. Who represent the transcendental vibrations? BG 10.25
Of all the transcendental vibrations, o ṁ (o ṁ -kāra) represents K ṛṣṇ a.
73. Which is the greatest mountains in the world? BG 10.25
the Himālayas, the greatest mountains in the world, also represent K ṛṣṇ a
74. Which is the highest and most beautiful trees? Bg 10.26
The banyan tree (aśvattha) is one of the highest and most beautiful trees, and people in
India often worship it as one of their daily morning rituals.
75. Who is the greatest devotee in the universe? 10.26
Amongst the demigods they also worship Nārada, who is considered the greatest
devotee in the universe. Thus he is the representation of K ṛṣṇ a as a devotee
76. Who is the best singer Gandharva planet? BG 10.26
The Gandharva planet is ﬁlled with entities who sing beautifully, and among them the
best singer is Citraratha. Amongst the perfect living entities, Kapila, the son of
Devahūti, is a representative of K ṛṣṇ a. He is considered an incarnation of K ṛṣṇ a
77. When The devotee demigods and the demons (asuras) once took part in churning the sea what was the
result? BG 10.27
From this churning, nectar and poison were produced, and Lord Śiva drank the poison.
From the nectar were produced many entities, of which there was a horse named
Uccai ḥ śravā. Another animal produced from the nectar was an elephant named
Airāvata. Because these two animals were produced from nectar, they have special
signiﬁcance, and they are representatives of K ṛṣṇ a.
78. Amongst the human beings who is the representative of Krishna? BG 10.27
Amongst the human beings, the king is the representative of K ṛṣṇ a because K ṛṣṇ a is the
maintainer of the universe, and the kings, who are appointed on account of their godly
qualiﬁcations, are maintainers of their kingdoms
79. Name the kings who always thought of the citizens’ welfare. In Vedic literature? BG 10.27
Kings like Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭ hira, Mahārāja Parīk ṣ it and Lord Rāma were all highly
righteous kings who always thought of the citizens’ welfare. In Vedic literature, the
king is considered to be the representative of God. In this age
80. What The thunderbolt represents? BG 10.28
The thunderbolt, indeed a mighty weapon, represents K ṛṣṇ a’s power.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita Chapter-10 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/855274 10/1481. What kind of cow`s called surabhi? BG 10.28
In K ṛṣṇ aloka in the spiritual sky there are cows which can be milked at any time, and
they give as much milk as one likes. Of course such cows do not exist in this material
world, but there is mention of them in K ṛṣṇ aloka. The Lord keeps many such cows,
which are called surabhi. It is stated that the Lord is engaged in herding the surabhi
cows
82. Who is Kandarpa ? BG 10.28
Kandarpa is the sex desire for presenting good sons; therefore Kandarpa is the
representative of K ṛṣṇ a. Sometimes sex is engaged in only for sense gratiﬁcation; such
sex does not represent K ṛṣṇ a. But sex for the generation of good children is called
Kandarpa and represents K ṛṣṇ a.
83. Whom Ananta and Varuna represent? Bg 10.29
Among the many-hooded Nāga serpents, Ananta is the greatest, as is the demigod
Varu ṇ a among the aquatics. They both represent K ṛṣṇ a
84. Who is Aryamā? BG 10.29
There is also a planet of Pitās, ancestors, presided over by Aryamā, who represents
K ṛṣṇa.
85. Who is Yama? BG 10.29
There are many living entities who give punishment to the miscreants, and among them
Yama is the chief. Yama is situated in a planet near this earthly planet. After death
those who are very sinful are taken there, and Yama arranges different kinds of
punishments for them.
86. Who is Ādityas? BG 10.30
Diti and Aditi are two sisters. The sons of Aditi are called Ādityas
87. Who is Daityas? BG 10.30
the sons of Diti are called Daityas
88. Who is Prahlāda? Bg 10.30
All the Ādityas are devotees of the Lord, and all the Daityas are atheistic. Although
Prahlāda was born in the family of the Daityas, he was a great devotee from his
childhood. Because of his devotional service and godly nature, he is considered to be a
representative of K ṛṣṇ a.
89. What time represents? BG 10.30
There are many subduing principles, but time wears down all things in the material
universe and so represents K ṛṣṇ a
90. In Animal whichi is most powerful and ferocious and represent Krishna? BG 10.30
Of the many animals, the lion is the most powerful and ferocious and represent Krishna.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita Chapter-10 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/855274 11/1491. Whom Garu ḍ a represents? BG 10.30
of the million varieties of birds, Garu ḍ a, the bearer of Lord Vi ṣṇ u, is the greatest.
92. What Lord Krishna says about wind and shark? BG 10.31
Lord Krishna says Of puriﬁers I am the wind, of the wielders of weapons I am Rāma, of
ﬁshes I am the shark, and of ﬂowing rivers I am the Ganges
93. What Lord Krishna says about creations? Bg 10.32
Lord Krishna says Of all creations I am the beginning and the end and also the middle, O
Arjuna. Of all sciences I am the spiritual science of the self, and among logicians I am
the conclusive truth
94. What is called jalpa? BG 10.32
Among logicians there are different kinds of argument. Supporting one’s argument with
evidence that also supports the opposing side is called jalpa
95. What is called vita ṇḍ ā and vada? Bg 10.32
Merely trying to defeat one’s opponent is called vita ṇḍ ā. But the actual conclusion is
called vāda
96. Who represent A-kar and Compound words? Bg 10.33
A-kāra, the ﬁrst letter of the Sanskrit alphabet, is the beginning of the Vedic literature.
Without a-kāra, nothing can be sounded; therefore it is the beginning of sound. In
Sanskrit there are also many compound words, of which the dual word, like rāma-
k ṛṣṇa, is called dvandva. In this compound, the words rāma and k ṛṣṇ a have the same
form, and therefore the compound is called dual.
97. Who represent Among all kinds of killers? BG 10.33
Among all kinds of killers, time is the ultimate because time kills everything. Time is
the representative of K ṛṣṇ a because in due course of time there will be a great ﬁre and
everything will be annihilated.
98. Among the living entities who are creators? BG 10.33
Among the living entities who are creators, Brahmā, who has four heads, is the chief.
Therefore he is a representative of the Supreme Lord, K ṛṣṇ a
99. What Lord Krishna says about death? BG 10.34
As soon as a man is born, he dies at every moment. Thus death is devouring every living
entity at every moment, but the last stroke is called death itself. That death is K ṛṣṇ a.
As for future development, all living entities undergo six basic changes. They are born,
they grow, they remain for some time, they reproduce, they dwindle, and ﬁnally they
vanish. Of these changes, the ﬁrst is deliverance from the womb, and that is K ṛṣṇ a. The
ﬁrst generation is the beginning of all future activities
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita Chapter-10 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/855274 12/14100. What are the seven opulences listed? BG 10.34
fame, fortune, ﬁne speech, memory, intelligence, steadfastness and patience – are
considered feminine. If a person possesses all of them or some of them he becomes
glorious. If a man is famous as a righteous man, that makes him glorious
101. What is good memory, or sm ṛ ti? BG 10.34
Sanskrit is a perfect language and is therefore very glorious. If after studying one can
remember a subject matter, he is gifted with a good memory, or sm ṛ ti.
102. What is intelligence (medhā)? BG 10.34
the ability not only to read many books on different subject matters but to understand
them and apply them when necessary is intelligence (medhā)
103. What is called ﬁrmness or steadfastness (dh ṛ ti)? BG 10.34
The ability to overcome unsteadiness is called ﬁrmness or steadfastness (dh ṛ ti).
104. What is the opulence called patience (k ṣ amā)? BG 10.34
when one is fully qualiﬁed yet is humble and gentle, and when one is able to keep his
balance both in sorrow and in the ecstasy of joy, he has the opulence called patience
(k ṣamā)
105. What is Sāma Veda and B ṛ hat-sāma? BG 10.35
It has already been explained by the Lord that amongst all the Vedas, He is the Sāma
Veda. The Sāma Veda is rich with beautiful songs played by the various demigods. One
of these songs is the B ṛ hat-sāma, which has an exquisite melody and is sung at
midnight.
106. What is Gāyatrī mantra is especially meant for? Bg 10.35
The Gāyatrī mantra is mentioned in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Because the Gāyatrī
mantra is especially meant for God realization, it represents the Supreme Lord. This
mantra is meant for spiritually advanced people, and when one attains success in
chanting it, he can enter into the transcendental position of the Lord. One must ﬁrst
acquire the qualities of the perfectly situated person, the qualities of goodness
according to the laws of material nature, in order to chant the Gāyatrī mantra. The
Gāyatrī mantra is very important in Vedic civilization and is considered to be the sound
incarnation of Brahman.
107. Whay November-December is considered the best of all months? BG 10.35
The month of November-December is considered the best of all months because in India
grains are collected from the ﬁelds at this time and the people become very happy. Of
course spring is a season universally liked because it is neither too hot nor too cold and
the ﬂowers and trees blossom and ﬂourish. In spring there are also many ceremonies
commemorating K ṛṣṇ a’s pastimes; therefore this is considered to be the most joyful of
all seasons
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita Chapter-10 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/855274 13/14108. What is gambling? Bg 10.36
There are many kinds of cheaters all over the universe. Of all cheating processes,
gambling stands supreme and therefore represents K ṛṣṇ a.
109. When K ṛṣṇ a was present on earth what he did? BG 10.36
When K ṛṣṇ a was present on earth, no one could surpass Him in strength. Even in His
childhood He lifted Govardhana Hill. No one can surpass Him in cheating, no one can
surpass Him in splendor, no one can surpass Him in victory, no one can surpass Him in
enterprise, and no one can surpass Him in strength.
110. Why Vāsudeva is not different from K ṛṣṇ a? Bg 10.37
Vāsudeva is K ṛṣṇ a’s immediate expansion, so Vāsudeva is not different from K ṛṣṇ a. It is
to be understood that the Vāsudeva referred to in this verse of Bhagavad-gītā is
Baladeva, or Balarāma, because He is the original source of all incarnations and thus He
is the sole source of Vāsudeva.
111. What is svā ṁ śa and vibhinnā ṁ śa? BG 10.37
The immediate expansions of the Lord are called svā ṁ śa (personal expansions), and
there are also expansions called vibhinnā ṁ śa (separated expansions)
112. Who is known as Dhanañjaya? BG 10.37
Amongst the sons of Pā ṇḍ u, Arjuna is famous as Dhanañjaya. He is the best of men and
therefore represents K ṛṣṇ a
113. Who is greatest among munis? Bg 10.37
Among the munis, or learned men conversant in Vedic knowledge, Vyāsa is the greatest
because he explained Vedic knowledge in many different ways for the understanding of
the common mass of people in this Age of Kali. And Vyāsa is also known as an
incarnation of K ṛṣṇ a; therefore Vyāsa also represents K ṛṣṇ a.
114. Who is famous among kavi`s? Bg 10.37
Kavis are those who are capable of thinking thoroughly on any subject matter. Among
the kavis, Uśanā,
115. Who is Śukrācārya? Bg 10.37
Śukrācārya, was the spiritual master of the demons; he was an extremely intelligent
and far-seeing politician. Thus Śukrācārya is another representative of the opulence of
K ṛṣṇa.
116. What is Among the conﬁdential activities? BG 10.38
Among the conﬁdential activities of hearing, thinking and meditating, silence is most
important because by silence one can make progress very quickly. The wise man is he
who can discriminate between matter and spirit, between God’s superior and inferior
natures. Such knowledge is K ṛṣṇ a Himself.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita Chapter-10 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/855274 14/14117. Why Lord Krishna is called omnipotent? Bg 10.39
Everything has a cause, and that cause or seed of manifestation is K ṛṣṇ a. Without
K ṛṣṇa’s energy, nothing can exist; therefore He is called omnipotent. Without His
potency, neither the movable nor the immovable can exist. Whatever existence is not
founded on the energy of K ṛṣṇ a is called māyā, “that which is not.”
118. What is Anything extraordinarily opulent should be considered to ? BG 10.41
Any glorious or beautiful existence should be understood to be but a fragmental
manifestation of K ṛṣṇ a’s opulence, whether it be in the spiritual or material world.
Anything extraordinarily opulent should be considered to represent K ṛṣṇ a’s opulence.
119. Why Lord Krishna is known as asamaurdhva? BG 10.42
which means that no one is superior to Him and that no one is equal to Him
