9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-1 1 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/857027 1/12Name: ___________________________________________ Date: ___________________
Bhagavad-gita chapter-11
1. Why Arjuna says that his illusion is over? BG 11.1
This means that Arjuna no longer thinks of K ṛṣṇ a as a mere human being, as a friend of
his, but as the source of everything. Arjuna is very enlightened and is glad that he has
such a great friend as K ṛṣṇ a,
2. Why Arjuna requesting K ṛṣṇ a in this chapter to show His universal form? Bg 11.1
but now he is thinking that although he may accept K ṛṣṇ a as the source of everything,
others may not. So in order to establish K ṛṣṇ a’s divinity for all, he is requesting K ṛṣṇ a
in this chapter to show His universal form. Actually when one sees the universal form of
K ṛṣṇa one becomes frightened, like Arjuna, but K ṛṣṇ a is so kind that after showing it
He converts Himself again into His original form
3. Why Arjuna addresses Lord K ṛṣṇ a as “lotus-eyed? Bg 11.2
Because K ṛṣṇ a’s eyes appear just like the petals of a lotus ﬂower
4. Arjuna is inspired by which the statements of K ṛṣṇ a? BG 11.3
The Lord said that because He entered into the material universe by His personal
representation, the cosmic manifestation has been made possible and is going on. Now
as far as Arjuna is concerned, he is inspired by the statements of K ṛṣṇ a,
5. How one can see the Lord by revelation? BG 11.4
It is said that one can neither see, hear, understand nor perceive the Supreme Lord,
K ṛṣṇa, by the material senses. But if one is engaged in loving transcendental service to
the Lord from the beginning, then one can see the Lord by revelation.
6. Why The word yogeśvara is also very signiﬁcant? BG 11.4
because the Lord has inconceivable power. If He likes, He can reveal Himself by His
grace, although He is unlimited
7. Why for living entity it is not possible to see or to understand the Supreme Lord? BG 11.4
Every living entity is only a spiritual spark; therefore it is not possible to see or to
understand the Supreme Lord.
8. Why K ṛṣṇ a must give one the power to see his Universal form? BG 11.5
K ṛṣṇa reveals this form. This universal form is not possible to be seen by any ordinary
man. K ṛṣṇ a must give one the power to see it
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-1 1 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/857027 2/129. How K ṛṣṇ a reveals these wonderful forms? BG 11.6
Even though Arjuna was a personal friend of K ṛṣṇ a and the most advanced of learned
men, it was still not possible for him to know everything about K ṛṣṇ a. Here it is stated
that humans have neither heard nor known of all these forms and manifestations. Now
K ṛṣṇa reveals these wonderful forms.
10. what are the many wonderful things which no one has ever seen or heard of before? BG 11.6
Lord Krishna says O best of the Bhāratas, see here the different manifestations of
Ādityas, Vasus, Rudras, Aśvinī-kumāras and all the other demigods. Behold the many
wonderful things which no one has ever seen or heard of before
11. What Arjuna can see everything that exists in any part of the universe? BG 11.7
No one can see the entire universe while sitting in one place. Even the most advanced
scientist cannot see what is going on in other parts of the universe. But a devotee like
Arjuna can see everything that exists in any part of the universe.
12. How Arjuna is able to see everything? Bg 11.7
K ṛṣṇa gives him the power to see anything he wants to see, past, present and future.
Thus by the mercy of K ṛṣṇ a, Arjuna is able to see everything.
13. Why Lord gives Arjuna the particular vision required to see that universal form? BG 11.8
To see the universal form of K ṛṣṇ a, Arjuna is told not to change his mind but his vision.
The universal form of K ṛṣṇ a is not very important; that will be clear in subsequent
verses. Yet because Arjuna wanted to see it, the Lord gives him the particular vision
required to see that universal form.
14. In what form a pure devotee would like to see Krishna as? BG 11.8
A pure devotee does not like to see K ṛṣṇ a in any form except His form with two hands;
a devotee must see His universal form by His grace, not with the mind but with spiritual
eyes.
15. What kind of devotees are attracted by loving features of Krishna and not by a godless display of opulences?
BG 11.8
Devotees who are correctly situated in a transcendental relationship with K ṛṣṇ a are
attracted by loving features, not by a godless display of opulences. The playmates of
K ṛṣṇa, the friends of K ṛṣṇ a and the parents of K ṛṣṇ a never want K ṛṣṇ a to show His
opulences.
16. Who not even know that K ṛṣṇ a is the Supreme Personality of Godhead? BG 11.8
The playmates of K ṛṣṇ a, the friends of K ṛṣṇ a and the parents of K ṛṣṇ a never want
K ṛṣṇa to show His opulences. They are so immersed in pure love that they do not even
know that K ṛṣṇ a is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In their loving exchange they
forget that K ṛṣṇ a is the Supreme Lord
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-1 1 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/857027 3/1217. What is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam about Krishna`s friends? BG 11.8
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is stated that the boys who play with K ṛṣṇ a are all highly pious
souls, and after many, many births they are able to play with K ṛṣṇ a. Such boys do not
know that K ṛṣṇ a is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They take Him as a personal
friend.
18. Why Arjuna wanted to see it to substantiate K ṛṣṇ a’s statements? BG 11.8
so that in the future people could understand that K ṛṣṇ a not only theoretically or
philosophically presented Himself as the Supreme but actually presented Himself as
such to Arjuna. Arjuna must conﬁrm this because Arjuna is the beginning of the
paramparā system.
19. What did Sanjaya said to King Dhritarastra? Bg 11.9
Sañjaya said: O King, having spoken thus, the Supreme Lord of all mystic power, the
Personality of Godhead, displayed His universal form to Arjuna.
20. the repeated use of the word many indicates what? BG 11,10-11
the word many indicates that there was no limit to the number of hands, mouths, legs
and other manifestations Arjuna was seeing
21. How Arjuna could see them while sitting in one place? BG 11.10-11
These manifestations were distributed throughout the universe, but by the grace of the
Lord, Arjuna could see them while sitting in one place. That was due to the
inconceivable potency of K ṛṣṇ a.
22. What Arjuna saw in Lord universal form? BG 11.12
What Arjuna saw was indescribable hundreds of thousands of suns were to rise at once
into the sky, their radiance might resemble the effulgence of the Supreme Person in
that universal form
23. Why The word tatra (“there”) is very signiﬁcant? Bg 11.13
The word tatra (“there”) is very signiﬁcant. It indicates that both Arjuna and K ṛṣṇ a
were sitting on the chariot when Arjuna saw the universal form.
24. Why Others on the battleﬁeld could not universal form? BG 11.13
because K ṛṣṇ a gave the vision only to Arjuna. Arjuna could see in the body of K ṛṣṇ a
many thousands of planets. As we learn from Vedic scriptures
25. How are many universes and many planets made up of? BG 11,13
Some of them are made of earth, some are made of gold, some are made of jewels,
some are very great, some are not so great, etc. Sitting on his chariot, Arjuna could see
all these. But no one could understand what was going on between Arjuna and K ṛṣṇ a
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-1 1 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/857027 4/1226. Once the divine vision is revealed what was the relation ship between Lord Krishna and Arjuna? Bg 11.14
the relationship between K ṛṣṇ a and Arjuna changes immediately. Before, K ṛṣṇ a and
Arjuna had a relationship based on friendship, but here, after the revelation, Arjuna is
offering obeisances with great respect, and with folded hands he is praying to K ṛṣṇ a.
He is praising the universal form. Thus Arjuna’s relationship becomes one of wonder
rather than friendship.
27. What Great devotees see K ṛṣṇ a as? BG 11.14
Great devotees see K ṛṣṇ a as the reservoir of all relationships.
28. How many relationship mentioned In the scriptures ? Bg 11.14
In the scriptures there are twelve basic kinds of relationships mentioned, and all of
them are present in K ṛṣṇ a.
29. Who is ocean of all the relationships? BG 11.14
Lord Krishna is the ocean of all the relationships exchanged between two living entities,
between the gods, or between the Supreme Lord and His devotees.
30. How Arjuna was inspired by the relationship of wonder? BG 11.14
Here Arjuna was inspired by the relationship of wonder, and in that wonder, although
he was by nature very sober, calm and quiet, he became ecstatic, his hair stood up,
and he began to offer his obeisances unto the Supreme Lord with folded hands. He was
not, of course, afraid. He was affected by the wonders of the Supreme Lord.
31. How Arjuna`s friendship with Lord Krishna was overwhelmed by ? BG 11.14
The immediate context is wonder; his natural loving friendship was overwhelmed by
wonder, and thus he reacted in this way.
32. What Arjuna sees in the Universe? Bg 11.15
Arjuna sees everything in the universe; therefore he sees Brahmā, who is the ﬁrst
creature in the universe, and the celestial serpent upon which the Garbhodaka-śāyī
Vi ṣṇu lies in the lower regions of the universe.
33. What is known as Vāsuki? BG 11.15
the celestial serpent upon which the Garbhodaka-śāyī Vi ṣṇ u lies in the lower regions of
the universe. This snake bed is called Vāsuki. There are also other snakes known as
Vāsuki.
34. What it means that from the beginning to the end, everything could be seen by Arjuna? Bg 11.15
Arjuna can see from the Garbhodaka-śāyī Vi ṣṇ u up to the topmost part of the universe
on the lotus-ﬂower planet where Brahmā, the ﬁrst creature of the universe, resides.
That means that from the beginning to the end, everything could be seen by Arjuna,
who was sitting in one place on his chariot. This was possible by the grace of the
Supreme Lord, K ṛṣṇ a.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-1 1 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/857027 5/1235. What Arjuna says to Lord Krishna? BG 11.16
O Lord of the universe, O universal form, I see in Your body many, many arms, bellies,
mouths and eyes, expanded everywhere, without limit. I see in You no end, no middle
and no beginning.
36. Why Arjuna says to Lord that Your form is difﬁcult to see? BG 11.17
because of its glaring effulgence, spreading on all sides, like blazing ﬁre or the
immeasurable radiance of the sun. Yet I see this glowing form everywhere, adorned
with various crowns, clubs and discs.
37. What is Arjuna`s openion? BG 11.18
Arjuna said to Lord Krishna that You are the supreme primal objective. You are the
ultimate resting place of all this universe. You are inexhaustible, and You are the
oldest. You are the maintainer of the eternal religion, the Personality of Godhead. This
is my opinion.
38. Why Arjuna says to Lord burning this entire universe by Your own radiance? BG 11.19
Arjuna says to Lord You are without origin, middle or end. Your glory is unlimited. You
have numberless arms, and the sun and moon are Your eyes. I see You with blazing ﬁre
coming forth from Your mouth, burning this entire universe by Your own radiance.
39. What is the meaning of Dyāv ā-p ṛ thivyo ḥ ? BG 11.20
the space between heaven and earth
40. loka-trayam meaning? BG 11.20
the three worlds
41. What The demigods in all the planetary systems are doing after watching universal form? Bg 11.21
The demigods in all the planetary systems feared the terriﬁc manifestation of the
universal form and its glaring effulgence and so prayed for protection.
42. Who are all beholding in wonder? Bg 11.22
All the various manifestations of Lord Śiva, the Ādityas, the Vasus, the Sādhyas, the
Viśvedevas, the two Aśvīs, the Maruts, the forefathers, the Gandharvas, the Yak ṣ as, the
Asuras and the perfected demigods are beholding You in wonder.
43. Who are all disturbed by looking at universal form? Bg 11.23
Arjuna says to Lord that all the planets with their demigods are disturbed at seeing
Your great form, with its many faces, eyes, arms, thighs, legs and bellies and Your
many terrible teeth; and as they are disturbed, so am I.
44. Why Arjuna says that he cannot maintain steadiness or equilibrium of mind? BG 11.24
all-pervading Vi ṣṇ u, seeing You with Your many radiant colors touching the sky, Your
gaping mouths, and Your great glowing eyes, my mind is perturbed by fear. I can no
longer maintain my steadiness or equilibrium of mind.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-1 1 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/857027 6/1245. Why Arjuna says In all directions I am bewildered? BG 11.25
After looking at the universal form of Lord Krishna Arjuna says O Lord of lords, O refuge
of the worlds, please be gracious to me. I cannot keep my balance seeing thus Your
blazing deathlike faces and awful teeth. In all directions I am bewildered.
46. When Lord promised to show Arjuna things he would be very interested in seeing. what Arjuna saw? BG
11.26-27
Now Arjuna sees that the leaders of the opposite party (Bhī ṣ ma, Dro ṇ a, Kar ṇ a and all
the sons of Dh ṛ tarā ṣṭ ra) and their soldiers and Arjuna’s own soldiers are all being
annihilated.
47. What is the indication of opposite party are all being annihilated? Bg 11.26-27
This is an indication that after the death of nearly all the persons assembled at
Kuruk ṣ etra, Arjuna will emerge victorious.
48. Who is supposed to be unconquerable? BG 11.26-27
Bhī ṣma
49. Why Bhī ṣ ma, who is supposed to be unconquerable, will also be smashed. So also Kar ṇ a? BG 11.26-27
Because they are in opposite party of Lord Krishna
50. How the great warriors enter blazing into Lord Krishna`s mouth? BG 11.28
As the many waves of the rivers ﬂow into the ocean, so do all these great warriors enter
blazing into lord Krishna`s mouth.
51. In what way all people rushing full speed into Lord Krishna`s mouth? BG 11.29
all people rushing full speed into Lords mouth as moths dash to destruction in a blazing
ﬁre.
52. How Lord Krishna was devouring all people? ?BG 11.30
Lord Krishna was devouring all people from all sides with his ﬂaming mouths
53. How Lord was Covering all the universe? BG 11.30
Covering all the universe with Lord effulgence
54. How Lord Krishna was terrible? BG 11.30
Lord Krishna was manifest with terrible, scorching rays
55. Why Arjuna tells Lord Krishna please tell me who You are? BG 11.31
Arjuna says to Lord Krishna O Lord of lords, so ﬁerce of form, please tell me who You
are. I offer my obeisances unto You; please be gracious to me. You are the primal Lord.
I want to know about You, for I do not know what Your mission is.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-1 1 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/857027 7/1256. Why Arjuna was puzzled by the various forms exhibited by K ṛṣṇ a? BG 11.32
Therefore he asked further about the actual mission of this devastating force. It is
written in the Vedas that the Supreme Truth destroys everything, even the brāhma ṇ as.
As stated in the Ka ṭ ha Upani ṣ ad (1.2.25)
57. How everyone who was present on that battleﬁeld would be devoured by Lord Krishna? BG 11.32
Eventually all the brāhma ṇ as, k ṣ atriyas and everyone else are devoured like a meal by
the Supreme. This form of the Supreme Lord is the all-devouring giant, and here K ṛṣṇ a
presents Himself in that form of all-devouring time. Except for a few Pā ṇḍ avas,
everyone who was present on that battleﬁeld would be devoured by Him.
58. Why Arjuna says that there would be no frustration? BG 11.32
Arjuna was not in favor of the ﬁght, and he thought it was better not to ﬁght; then
there would be no frustration.
59. In reply what Lord says to Arjuna? Bg 11.32
In reply, the Lord is saying that even if he did not ﬁght, every one of them would be
destroyed, for that was His plan. If Arjuna stopped ﬁghting, they would die in another
way. Death could not be checked, even if he did not ﬁght.
60. What is the law of nature? BG 11.32
In fact, they were already dead. Time is destruction, and all manifestations are to be
vanquished by the desire of the Supreme Lord. That is the law of nature.
61. What Savya-sācin refers to? Bg 11.33
Savya-sācin refers to one who can shoot arrows very expertly in the ﬁeld; thus Arjuna is
addressed as an expert warrior capable of delivering arrows to kill his enemies.
62. What is the meaning of nimitta-mātram? Bg 11.33
Just become an instrument”: nimitta-mātram. This word is also very signiﬁcant. The
whole world is moving according to the plan of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Foolish persons who do not have sufﬁcient knowledge think that nature is moving
without a plan and all manifestations are but accidental formations. There are many so-
called scientists who suggest that perhaps it was like this, or maybe like that, but there
is no question of “perhaps” and “maybe.” There is a speciﬁc plan being carried out in
this material world.
63. What is a chance for the conditioned souls? BG 11.33
This cosmic manifestation is a chance for the conditioned souls to go back to Godhead,
back to home. As long as they have the domineering mentality which makes them try to
lord it over material nature, they are conditioned.
64. Who is most intelligent? BG 11.33
anyone who can understand the plan of the Supreme Lord and cultivate K ṛṣṇ a
consciousness is most intelligent. The creation and destruction of the cosmic
manifestation are under the superior guidance of God.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-1 1 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/857027 8/1265. Who planned the Battle of Kuruk ṣ etra? BG 11.33
Thus the Battle of Kuruk ṣ etra was fought according to the plan of God. Arjuna was
refusing to ﬁght, but he was told that he should ﬁght in accordance with the desire of
the Supreme Lord. Then he would be happy.
66. Who is is perfect? BG 11.33
If one is in full K ṛṣṇ a consciousness and his life is devoted to the Lord’s transcendental
service, he is perfect.
67. How is so kind and merciful to His devotees? BG 11.34
Every plan is made by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but He is so kind and
merciful to His devotees that He wants to give the credit to His devotees who carry out
His plan according to His desire.
68. How Life should therefore move? BG 11.34
Life should therefore move in such a way that everyone acts in K ṛṣṇ a consciousness and
understands the Supreme Personality of Godhead through the medium of a spiritual
master.
69. How Lord Krishna`s plan understood by devotees? Bg 11.34
The plans of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are understood by His mercy, and the
plans of the devotees are as good as His plans.
70. How one be victorious in the struggle for existence? BG 11.34
The plans of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are understood by His mercy, and the
plans of the devotees are as good as His plans. One should follow such plans and be
victorious in the struggle for existence.
71. How Arjuna began to pray Lord krishna after seeing his universal form? BG 11.35
because of the situation created by the universal form of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Arjuna became bewildered in wonder; thus he began to offer his respectful
obeisances to K ṛṣṇ a again and again, and with faltering voice he began to pray, not as a
friend, but as a devotee in wonder.
72. How Arjuna conﬁrmed that K ṛṣṇ a is the maintainer and the object of worship for the devotees and the
destroyer of the undesirables? BG 11.36
Arjuna, after hearing from K ṛṣṇ a about the outcome of the Battle of Kuruk ṣ etra,
became enlightened, and as a great devotee and friend of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead he said that everything done by K ṛṣṇ a is quite ﬁt. Arjuna conﬁrmed that
K ṛṣṇa is the maintainer and the object of worship for the devotees and the destroyer of
the undesirables.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-1 1 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/857027 9/1273. Why many demigods, siddhas, and the intelligentsia of the higher planets were observing fight in
Kurukshetra? BG 11.36
Arjuna understood herein that when the Battle of Kuruk ṣ etra was being concluded, in
outer space there were present many demigods, siddhas, and the intelligentsia of the
higher planets, and they were observing the ﬁght because K ṛṣṇ a was present there.
74. Why demons and atheists, could not stand it when the Lord was praised?BG 11.36
others, who were demons and atheists, could not stand it when the Lord was praised.
Out of their natural fear of the devastating form of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, they ﬂed. K ṛṣṇ a’s treatment of the devotees and the atheists is praised by
Arjuna.
75. Why Arjuna is addressing K ṛṣṇ a as mahātmā? BG 11.37
which means that He is most magnanimous and unlimited. Ananta indicates that there
is nothing which is not covered by the inﬂuence and energy of the Supreme Lord, and
deveśa means that He is the controller of all demigods and is above them all. He is the
shelter of the whole universe.
76. Why Arjuna especially mentions that K ṛṣṇ a is greater than Brahmā ? BG 11.37
because Brahmā is created by Him. Brahmā is born out of the lotus stem grown from
the navel abdomen of Garbhodaka-śāyī Vi ṣṇ u, who is K ṛṣṇ a’s plenary expansion;
therefore Brahmā and Lord Śiva, who is born of Brahmā, and all other demigods must
offer their respectful obeisances. It is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that the Lord is
respected by Lord Śiva and Brahmā and similar other demigods.
77. Why The word ak ṣ aram is very signiﬁcant? BG 11.37
because this material creation is subject to destruction but the Lord is above this
material creation. He is the cause of all causes, and being so, He is superior to all the
conditioned souls within this material nature as well as the material cosmic
manifestation itself. He is therefore the all-great Supreme.
78. What is Nidhānam means? BG 11.38
Everything is resting on the Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore He is the
ultimate rest. Nidhānam means that everything, even the Brahman effulgence, rests on
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, K ṛṣṇ a. He is the knower of everything that is
happening in this world, and if knowledge has any end, He is the end of all knowledge
79. Why Lord is addressed here as air ? BG 11.39
The Lord is addressed here as air because the air is the most important representation
of all the demigods, being all-pervasive.
80. Why Arjuna addresses K ṛṣṇ a as the great-grandfather? BG 11.39
Arjuna also addresses K ṛṣṇ a as the great-grandfather because He is the father of
Brahmā, the ﬁrst living creature in the universe.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-1 1 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/857027 10/1281. What Arjuna says Out of loving ecstasy for K ṛṣṇ a? Bg 11.40
Out of loving ecstasy for K ṛṣṇ a, his friend, Arjuna is offering his respects from all sides.
He is accepting that He is the master of all potencies and all prowess and far superior
to all the great warriors assembled on the battleﬁeld.
82. Why Arjuna is asking pardon and requesting K ṛṣṇ a to excuse him? BG 11.41-42
Although K ṛṣṇ a is manifested before Arjuna in His universal form, Arjuna remembers his
friendly relationship with K ṛṣṇ a and is therefore asking pardon and requesting K ṛṣṇ a to
excuse him for the many informal gestures which arise out of friendship.
83. How Arjuna did not know how many times he may have dishonored K ṛṣṇ a by addressing Him? BG 11.41-42
Arjuna did not know how many times he may have dishonored K ṛṣṇ a by addressing Him
“O my friend,” “O K ṛṣṇ a,” “O Yādava,” etc., without acknowledging His opulence.
84. How the transcendental loving reciprocation between the devotee and the Lord? BG 11.41-42
K ṛṣṇa is so kind and merciful that in spite of such opulence He played with Arjuna as a
friend. Such is the transcendental loving reciprocation between the devotee and the
Lord.
85. How The relationship between the living entity and K ṛṣṇ a is ﬁxed eternally? BG 11.41-42
it cannot be forgotten, as we can see from the behavior of Arjuna. Although Arjuna has
seen the opulence in the universal form, he cannot forget his friendly relationship with
K ṛṣṇa
86. Why Krishna is the original spiritual master? BG 11.43
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, K ṛṣṇ a, is worshipable as a father is worshipable
for his son. He is the spiritual master because He originally gave the Vedic instructions
to Brahmā and presently He is also instructing Bhagavad-gītā to Arjuna; therefore He is
the original spiritual master,
87. Why K ṛṣṇ a’s activities are different from others? BG 11.43
Whoever knows K ṛṣṇ a’s transcendental body, activities and perfection, after quitting
his body, returns to Him and doesn’t come back again to this miserable world.
Therefore one should know that K ṛṣṇ a’s activities are different from others.
88. How K ṛṣṇ a’s devotees relate to K ṛṣṇ a in various relationships? BG 11.44
one might treat K ṛṣṇ a as a son, or one might treat K ṛṣṇ a as a husband, as a friend, or
as a master. K ṛṣṇ a and Arjuna are related in friendship. As the father tolerates, or the
husband or a master tolerates, so K ṛṣṇ a tolerates.
89. Why Arjuna therefore is asking K ṛṣṇ a to show His Nārāya ṇ a form? BG 11.45
because He can assume any form. This universal form is material and temporary, as the
material world is temporary. But in the Vaiku ṇṭ ha planets He has His transcendental
form with four hands as Nārāya ṇ a.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-1 1 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/857027 11/1290. What are the four hands hold different arrangements of symbols? BG 11.45
the four hands hold different arrangements of symbols – the conchshell, mace, lotus
and disc. According to the different hands these four things are held in, the Nārāya ṇ as
are variously named. All of these forms are one with K ṛṣṇ a
91. the Lord is eternally situated in hundreds and thousands of forms, and what are the main forms? BG 11.46
the main forms are those like Rāma, N ṛ si ṁ ha, Nārāya ṇ a, etc. There are innumerable
forms. But Arjuna knew that K ṛṣṇ a is the original Personality of Godhead assuming His
temporary universal form. He is now asking to see the form of Nārāya ṇ a, a spiritual
form.
92. How Lord showed His universal form, full of effulgence and opulence? BG 11.47
This form was glaring like the sun, and its many faces were rapidly changing. K ṛṣṇ a
showed this form just to satisfy the desire of His friend Arjuna. This form was
manifested by K ṛṣṇ a through His internal potency, which is inconceivable by human
speculation. No one had seen this universal form of the Lord before Arjuna, but because
the form was shown to Arjuna, other devotees in the heavenly planets and in other
planets in outer space could also see it.
93. Someone has commented that this form was shown to Duryodhana also when K ṛṣṇ a went to Duryodhana to
negotiate for peace? BG 11.47
Unfortunately, Duryodhana did not accept the peace offer, but at that time K ṛṣṇ a
manifested some of His universal forms. But those forms are different from this one
shown to Arjuna. It is clearly said that no one had ever seen this form before.
94. Who can have divine vision? BG 11.48
Divine means godly. Unless one attains the status of divinity as a demigod, he cannot
have divine vision.
95. what is a demigod? BG 11.48
It is stated in the Vedic scriptures that those who are devotees of Lord Vi ṣṇ u are
demigods (vi ṣṇ u-bhakta ḥ sm ṛ to daiva ḥ ). Those who are atheistic, i.e., who do not
believe in Vi ṣṇ u, or who recognize only the impersonal part of K ṛṣṇ a as the Supreme,
cannot have the divine vision. It is not possible to decry K ṛṣṇ a and at the same time
have the divine vision. One cannot have the divine vision without becoming divine
96. What are the sūtras? BG 11.48
Kalpa-sūtras and Mīmā ṁ sā-sūtras – for studying the method of sacriﬁce.
97. What is Dānai ḥ refers to? Bg 11.48
Dānai ḥ refers to charity which is offered to a suitable party, such as those who are
engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord – the brāhma ṇ as and the
Vai ṣṇ avas. Similarly, “pious activities” refers to the agni-hotra and the prescribed
duties of the different castes.
9/21/2018 Bhagavad-gita chapter-1 1 - W ordMint
https://wordmint.com/puzzles/857027 12/1298. one can accept bodily penances, give charity, study the Vedas, etc. but can he see universal for like Arjuna?
BG 11.48
One can accept bodily penances, give charity, study the Vedas, etc. – but unless he is a
devotee like Arjuna, it is not possible to see that universal form. Those who are
impersonalists are also imagining that they are seeing the universal form of the Lord,
but from Bhagavad-gītā we understand that the impersonalists are not devotees.
Therefore they are unable to see the universal form of the Lord.
99. Bhagavad-gītā is considered the preliminary study of the science of God, BG 11.48
still it is so perfect that it enables one to distinguish what is what. The followers of a
pseudo incarnation may say that they have also seen the transcendental incarnation of
God, the universal form, but that is unacceptable because it is clearly stated here that
unless one becomes a devotee of K ṛṣṇ a one cannot see the universal form of God. So
one ﬁrst of all has to become a pure devotee of K ṛṣṇ a; then he can claim that he can
show the universal form of what he has seen.
100. Why The word saumya-vapu ḥ is very signiﬁcant? BG 11.50
Saumya-vapu ḥ is a very beautiful form; it is known as the most beautiful form. When
He was present, everyone was attracted simply by K ṛṣṇ a’s form, and because K ṛṣṇ a is
the director of the universe, He just banished the fear of Arjuna, His devotee, and
showed him again His beautiful form of K ṛṣṇ a.
101. Why it is indicating that K ṛṣṇ a’s two-handed form is still more conﬁdential? Bg 11.52
One may be able to see the universal form of K ṛṣṇ a by adding a little tinge of
devotional service to various activities like penances, Vedic study and philosophical
speculation. It may be possible, but without a tinge of bhakti one cannot see; that has
already been explained. Still, beyond that universal form, the form of K ṛṣṇ a with two
hands is still more difﬁcult to see, even for demigods like Brahmā and Lord Śiva.
102. What is su-durdarśam described as? BG 11.54
The personal forms of K ṛṣṇ a, the two-handed form and the four-handed, are described
as su-durdarśam, very difﬁcult to see. They are completely different from the
temporary universal form shown to Arjuna. The four-handed form of Nārāya ṇ a and the
two-handed form of K ṛṣṇ a are eternal and transcendental, whereas the universal form
exhibited to Arjuna is temporary.
103. For Whom two-handed form of K ṛṣṇ a is the most dear? Bg 11.54
Universal form form may seem wonderful to persons who are involved in elevating
themselves by fruitive activities, but to persons who are engaged in devotional service
the two-handed form of K ṛṣṇ a is the most dear.
104. Why The term sa ṅ ga-varjita ḥ is very signiﬁcant? BG 11.55
One should disassociate himself from persons who are against K ṛṣṇ a. Not only are the
atheistic persons against K ṛṣṇ a, but so also are those who are attracted to fruitive
activities and mental speculation. Therefore the pure form of devotional service is
described in Bhakti-rasām ṛ ta-sindhu
