Name: ___________________________________________ Date: ___________________ Bhagavad -gita-chapter -3 1. What is recomended in buddhi -yoga? BG 3.1 the ocean of material grief. And the path of realization has been recommended: buddhi -yoga, 2. What Arjuna wanted to do by using K ṛṣṇaconsciousness as an excuse? BG 3.1 Arjuna wanted to skillfully avoid the fighting by using K ṛṣṇaconsciousness as an excuse. 3. How Lord Kr sna wanted to clear confusion to Arjuna? BG 3.2 Lord Krusna wanted to clear up these apparently confusing matters so that any common man could accept them without misinterpretation. 4. What Arjuna was not able to follow? BG 3.2 Arjuna could not follow the process of K ṛṣṇaconsciousness – either by inertia or by active service. 5. Arjuna by his questions he is clearing the path of K ṛṣṇaconsciousness for all students who seriously want to understand the mystery of the Bhagavad -gītā. BG 3.1 TRUE FALSE 6. What are the two classes of men who try to realize the self? BG 3.3 sāṅkhya-yoga and karma -yoga, or buddhi -yoga. 7. Explain Sā ṅkhya-yoga, or the analytical study of the nature of spirit and matter. BG 3.3 is the subject matter for persons who are inclined to speculate and understand things by experimental knowledge and philosophy. 8. Explain buddhi -yoga, or K ṛṣṇaconsciousness. BG 3.3 one can be relieved from the bonds of action; and, furthermore, there is no flaw in the process.
9. Religion without philosophy is sentiment, or sometimes fanatici sm, while philosophy without religion is mental speculation. BG 3.3 TRUE FALSE 10. Why Kṛṣṇaconsciousness is better? BG 3.3 because it does not depend on purifying the senses by a philosophical process. K ṛṣṇaconsciousness is itself the purifying process, and by the direct method of devotional service it is simultaneously easy and sublime. 11. How one can attain success? BG 3.4 when one has been purified by the discharge of the prescribed form of duties which are laid down just to purify the hearts of materialistic men. Without purification, one cannot attain success 12. What is the fourth order of life ? BG 3.4 sannyāsa 13. How one can become as good as Nārāya ṇa? BG 3.4 According to the empirical philosophers, simply by adopting sannyāsa, or retiring from fruitive activities, one at once becomes as good as Nārāya ṇa. 14. What Lord Krusna openion about sannyāsa? BG 3.4 According to Lord Krusna Without purification of heart, sannyāsa is simply a disturbance to the social order. 15. What is accept ed by the Lord? BG 3.4 if someone takes to the transcendental service of the Lord, even without discharging his prescribed duties, whatever he may be able to advance in the cause is accepted by the Lord 16. What is the meaning of "Sv -alpam apy asya dharmas ya trāyate mahato bhayāt". BG 3.4 Even a slight performance of such a principle enables one to overcome great difficulties. 17. What is the material body required to move? BG 3.5 Without the presence of the spirit soul, the material body cannot move.
18. How the spirit soul work on the body? BG 3.5 The body is only a dead vehicle to be worked by the spirit soul, which is always active and cannot stop even for a moment. 19. What kind of process is necessary for reaching K ṛṣṇaconsci ousness? BG 3.5 the purificatory process is necessary for reaching this point of K ṛṣṇaconsciousness. 20. How one can progress in purifying his existence? BG 3.6 If one follows the rules and regulations of his particular status, he can make gradual progress in purifying his existence. 21. How can one be far superior? BG 3.7 If a sincere person tries to control the active senses by the mind and begins karma -yoga [in K ṛṣṇaconsciousness] without attachment, he is by far superior. Purport: 22. Why Lord Krusna ask Arjuna to perform his prescribed duty? BG 3.8 For doing so is better than not working. One cannot even maintain one’s physical body without work. 23. After all, one has to maintain one’s body and soul together by some work. Work should not be g iven up capriciously, BG 3.8 TRUE FALSE 24. What causes bondage in this material world? BG 3.9 Work done as a sacrifice for Vi ṣṇuhas to be performed; otherwise work causes bondage in this material world. 25. What is Yajña means ? BG 3.9 Yajña means Lord Viṣṇu, or sacrificial performances. 26. Who had the opportunity to work under Lord Krusna? BG 3.9 Arjuna
27. What should be done to satisfaction of K ṛṣṇa?BG 3.9 Nothing should be performed for sense gratification, but everything should be done for the satisfaction of K ṛṣṇa. 28. What alone can raise one to the kingdom of God? BG 3.9 Kṛṣṇaconsciousness practice will not only save one from the reaction of work, but also gradually elevate one to transcendental loving service of the Lord, which alone can raise one to the kingdom of God. 29. In the beginning of creation Whom did the Lord of all creatures sent? BG 3.10 the Lord of all creatures sent forth generations of men and demigods, along with sacrifices for Vi ṣṇu, 30. What di d the Lord of all creatures Blessed? BG 3.10 He blessed them by saying, “Be thou happy by this yajña [sacrifice] because its performance will bestow upon you everything desirable for living happily and achieving liberation.” 31. What is recomended In the Age of Kali? BG 3.10 the saṅkīrtana -yajña (the chanting of the names of God) is recommended by the Vedic scriptures, 32. How prosperity will reign for all? BG 3.11 The demigods, being pleased by sacrifices, will also please you, and thus, by cooperation between men and demigods, prosperity will reign for all. 33. How the demigods help in maintaining the body and soul of every living entity? BG 3.11 The demigods are empowered administrators of material affairs. The supply of air, light, water and all other benedictions for maintaining the body and soul of every living entity is entrusted to the demigods, 34. Who is the beneficiary of all kinds of yajñas? BG 3.11 KṛṣṇaHimself is the beneficiary of all kinds of yajñas:
35. How one can av oid scarcity in the supply of natural products? BG 3.11 KṛṣṇaHimself is the beneficiary of all kinds of yajñas When these yajñas are perfectly performed, naturally the demigods in charge of the different departments of supply are pleased, and there is no scarcity in the supply of natural products. 36. How one’s eatables become sanctified? BG 3.11 By performance of yajña one’s eatables become sanctified 37. How one’s very existence becomes purified? BG 3.11 by eating sanctified foodstuffs one’s very existence becomes purified 38. How one`s finer tissues in the memory become sanctified? BG 3.11 by the purification of existence finer tissues in the memory become sanctified, 39. How one can think of the path of liberation ? BG 3.11 when memory is sanctif ied one can think of the path of liberation, and all these combined together lead to K ṛṣṇaconsciousness 40. On behalf of the Supreme Personality of Godhead who is supplying agent? BG 3.12 The demigods are authorized supplying agents on behalf of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vi ṣṇu. 41. meat -eaters are recommended to worship which god? BG 3.12 the goddess Kālī, 42. What is pañca -mahā -yajña? BG 3.12 five yajñas, known as pañca -mahā -yajña 43. How one certainly become thieves, and therefore punished by the laws of material nature? BG 3.12 If we forget the purpose of human life and simply take supplies from the agents of the Lord for sense gratification and become more and more entangled in material existence, which is not the purpose of creation, ce rtainly we become thieves,
44. How A society of thieves can never be happy? BG 3.12 because they have no aim in life. 45. What is the easiest way to performance of yajña? BG 3.12 namely the sa ṅkīrtana -yajña, which can be performed by anyone in the world who accepts the principles of K ṛṣṇaconsciousness. 46. What kind of devotee`s released from all kinds of sins? BG 3.13 The devotees of the Lord are released from all kinds of sins because they eat food which is offered first for sacri fice. 47. What kind of people verily eat only sin? BG 3.13 People who prepare food for personal sense enjoyment, verily eat only sin. 48. Who are called santas? BG 3.13 The devotees of the Supreme Lord, or the persons who are in K ṛṣṇaconsciousness, are called santas 49. What is the meaning of Mukunda? BG 3.13 the giver of liberation 50. What is the meaning of K ṛṣṇa?BG 3.13 the all -attractive person 51. Who is called devotee of the Lord? BG 3.14 food offered to Lord Vi ṣṇuand then taken by us makes us sufficiently resistant to material affection, and one who is accustomed to this practice is called a devotee of the Lord. 52. Who are all servants of the Lord? BG 3.14 rains are controlled by demigods like Indra, sun, moon, etc., and they are all servan ts of the Lord.
53. What is the law of nature? BG 3.14 The Lord can be satisfied by sacrifices; therefore, one who cannot perform them will find himself in scarcity – that is the law of nature. 54. What kind of yagna is prescribed for t his age? BG 3.14 specifically the sa ṅkīrtana -yajña prescribed for this age, 55. What can save us at least from scarcity of food? BG 3.14 saṅkīrtana -yajña must therefore be performed to save us at least from scarcity of food supply. 56. How yajña is born of prescribed duties? BG 3.14 All living bodies subsist on food grains, which are produced from rains. Rains are produced by performance of yajña [sacrifice], and yajña is born of prescribed duties. 57. Who is yajña -puruṣa? BG 3.15 Lord Viṣṇuis yajña -puruṣa 58. What is vikarma, or unauthorized or sinful work? BG 3.15 Anything performed without the direction of the Vedas is called vikarma, or unauthorized or sinful work. 59. How many Vedas are there? A. 3 B. 4 C. 2 D. 5 60. Name the four Vedas? BG 3.15 The four Vedas – namely the Ṛg Veda, Yajur Veda, Sāma Veda and Atharva Veda 61. What will take the place of performance of Vedic yajñas, or karmas.? BG 3.15 adopt the principles of K ṛṣṇaconsciousness, and that will take the place of performance of Ved ic yajñas, or karmas.
62. What kind of a person leads a life full of sin? BG 3.16 one who does not follow in human life the cycle of sacrifice thus established by the Vedas certainly leads a life full of sin . 63. What kind of person lives in vain? BG 3.16 Living only for the satisfaction of the senses, such a person lives in vain. 64. Which philosophy is condemned herein by the Lord? BG 3.16 The mammonist philosophy of “work very hard and enjoy sense gratification” is condemned herei n by the Lord. 65. Who does not have any duty to perform? BG 3.17 A person who is fully K ṛṣṇaconscious, and is fully satisfied by his acts in K ṛṣṇaconsciousness, no longer has any duty to perform. 66. What kind of person is no longer interested in material activities? BG 3.17 Kṛṣṇaconscious person His duty thus becomes self -illuminated by the grace of the Lord, and therefore he no longer has any obligations to the Vedic injunctions. Such a K ṛṣṇaconscious person is no longer interested in mate rial activities 67. What kind of a person is self -realized man? BG 3.18 A self -realized man has no purpose to fulfill in the discharge of his prescribed duties, nor has he any reason not to perform such work. Nor has he any need to depend on any other livi ng being. 68. What is the perfect action of the highest degree, recommended by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī K ṛṣṇa?BG 3.19 To be a good man or a nonviolent man is a personal attachment, but to act on behalf of the Supreme is to act without attachment for the result. That is perfect action of the highest degree, recommended by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī K ṛṣṇa. 69. Who is the king Janaka? BG 3.20 Janaka was the father of Sītā and father -in-law of Lord Śrī Rāma.
70. Which place is king Janaka`s kingdom? BG 3.20 Mithilā 71. Why Kings such as Janaka attained perfection solely by performance of prescribed duties? Bg 3.20 just for the sake of educating the people in general one should perform their wor k. 72. Why Lord’s eternal friend Arjuna had no need to fight in the Battle of Kuruk ṣetra but still why did he do so? BG 3.20 to teach people in general that violence is also necessary in a situation where good arguments fail. 73. Who is called ācārya, or the id eal teacher? BG 3.21 a teacher should behave properly before he begins teaching. One who teaches in that way is called ācārya, or the ideal teache r. 74. Why Lord K ṛṣṇais engaged on the Battlefield of Kuruk ṣetra? Bg 3.22 One who must receive the results of work has some designated duty, but one who has nothing to achieve within the three planetary systems certainly has no duty 75. What is the duty of k ṣatriyas ? BG 3.22 the kṣatriyas are duty -bound to give protection to the distressed. 76. Why Lord Kṛṣṇawas performing all the religious duties at home and out of home, as required of a householder? BG 3.23 He descended to establish the principles of religion He followed the prescribed rules. Otherwise, common men would follow in His footsteps, because He is the greatest authority. 77. What is Var ṇa-saṅkara? BG 3.24 Varṇa-saṅkara is unwanted population which disturbs the peace of the general society. 78. What is the position of the īśvaras? BG 3.24 those who can actually control the movement s of the sun and moon, as superior. Without such power, one cannot imitate the īśvaras,
79. A person in K ṛṣṇaconsciousness and a person not in K ṛṣṇaconsciousness are differentiated by different desires? BG 3.25 Kṛṣṇaconscious person does not do anything which is not conducive to development of K ṛṣṇaconsciousness. who is too much attached to material activities. 80. How realized soul in K ṛṣṇaconsciousness person should behave? BG 3.26 a realized soul in K ṛṣṇaconsciousne ss should not disturb others in their activities or understanding, but he should act by showing how the results of all work can be dedicated to the service of K ṛṣṇa. 81. What will works under the supervision of the Supreme Lord? BG 3.27 the mechanism of the body is produced by material nature, which works under the supervision of the Supreme Lord. 82. What the ignorant man forgets about god? BG 3.27 The ignorant man forgets that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is known as H ṛṣīkeśa, or the master of the senses of the material body, 83. What is the Absolute Truth in three different features? BG 3.28 the Absolute Truth in three different features – namely Brahman, Paramātmā and the Supreme Personality of Godhead 84. Who is called manda? BG 3.29 one who is too much attached to the bodily consciousness is called manda, or a lazy person without understanding of spirit soul. 85. Who cannot appreciate activities in K ṛṣṇaconsciousness? BG 3.29 Men who are ignorant cannot appreciate activities in K ṛṣṇaconsciousness, 86. What is bsolutely necessary for the human being? BG 3.29 the point of approaching ignorant men to try to engage them in the acts of K ṛṣṇaconsciousness, which are absolutely necessary for the human being.
87. How Lord Krsna clearly indicates the purpose of the Bhagavad -gītā? BG 3.30 surrendering all your works unto Me, with full knowledge of Me, without desires for profit, with no claims to proprietorship, and free from lethargy, 88. How Śrī K ṛṣṇaorderd Arjuna to fig ht? Bg 3.30 Arjuna was therefore ordered by Śrī K ṛṣṇato fight as if the Lord were his military commander. 89. What is called adhyātma -cetās. Nirāśī ḥ? BG 3.30 means that one has to act on the order of the master but should not expect fruitive results. 90. What is the real purport of mayi, or “unto Me.”? BG 3.30 one has to realize that nothing in the world belongs to any individual person, but that everything belongs to the Supreme Lord. That is the real purport of mayi, or “unto Me.” 91. What is called n irmama, or “nothing is mine.” ? BG 3.30 one acts in K ṛṣṇaconsciousness, certainly he does not claim proprietorship over anything. This consciousness is called nirmama, or “nothing is mine.” 92. What is vigata -jvara means? BG 3.30 without feverish mentality or lethargy. 93. Who can become free from the bondage of fruitive actions? BG 3.31 Those persons who execute their duties according to Lord injunctions and who follow this teaching faithfully, without envy, become free from the bondage of fruitiv e actions. 94. Who becomes liberated from the bondage of the law of karma? an ordinary man with firm faith in the eternal injunctions of the Lord, even though unable to execute such orders, becomes liberated from the bondage of the law of karma.
95. Why no hope of perfection of life for a disobedient person? BG 3.32 A disobedient person, however great he may be, is ignorant of his own self, and of the Supreme Brahman, Paramātmā and the Personality of Godhead, due to a vacant heart. Therefore there is no hope of perfection of life for him. 96. How to get out of the material entanglement? BG 3.33 Kṛṣṇaconsciousness helps one to get out of the material entanglement 97. What can detaches one from all kinds of sensory activities? BG 3.34 Kṛṣṇaconsciousness, or acting always in the loving service of K ṛṣṇa,detaches one from all kinds of sensory activities. 98. How one can cleanse his heart? BG 3.35 Everyone has to cleanse his heart by a gradual process, not abruptly. 99. In that complete stage of K ṛṣṇaconsciousness how one can act? BG 3.35 In that complete stage of K ṛṣṇaconsciousness, the k ṣatriya may act as a brāhma ṇa, or a brāhma ṇa may act as a k ṣatriya. In the transcendental stage, 100. Give an example of k ṣatriya but later on he acted as a brāhma ṇa? BG 3.35 Viśvāmitra was originally a k ṣatriya, but later on he acted as a brāhmaṇa 101. Give an example of brāhma ṇa but later on he acted as a k ṣatriya? BG 3.35 Paraśurāma was a brāhma ṇa but later on he acted as a k ṣatriya. 102. How lust is the greatest enemy of the living entity,? BG 3.37 when lust is unsatisfied, it turns into wrath; wrath is transformed into illusion, and illusion continues the material existe nce. Therefore, lust is the greatest enemy of the livi ng entity,
103. Give an example of both lust and wrath can be spiritualized? BG 3.37 Hanumān, the great servitor of Lord Rāma, exhibited his wrath by burning the golden city of Rāva ṇa, but by doing so he became the greatest devotee of the Lord. Here also, 104. How the lust covered under different manifestations? BG 3.38 like smoke in the fire, dust on the mirror, and the womb about the embryo 105. Which is the beginning of K ṛṣṇaconsciousness? BG 3.38 Although fire is necessary where th ere is smoke, there is no overt manifestation of fire in the early stage. This stage is like the beginning of K ṛṣṇaconsciousness 106. What is cleansing process of mine( second stage)? BG 3.38 The dust on the mirror refers to a cleansing process of the mirror of the mind by so many spiritual methods. The best process is to chant the holy names of the Lord. 107. Which is the helpless position? BG 3.38 The embryo covered by the womb is an analogy illustrating a helpless position, for the child in the womb i s so helpless that he cannot even move. 108. How the helpless position compared to that of the trees? BG 3.38 The trees are also living entities, but they have been put in such a condition of life by such a great exhibition of lust tha t they are almost void of all consciousness. 109. How the human form of life is a chance for the living entity to escape the entanglement of material existence? BG 3.38 the human form of life is a chance for the living entity to escape the entanglement of material existence. In the human form of life, one can conquer the enemy, lust, by cultivation of K ṛṣṇaconsciousness under able guidance. 110. What center of all the activities of the senses? BG 3.40 Mind is the center of all the activities of the senses
111. Who should be considered like an ass or a cow? BG 3.40 A human being who identifies this body made of three elements with his self 112. What is Jñāna and Vijñāna refers to? BG 3.41 Jñāna refers to knowledge of self as distinguished from non -self. Vijñāna refers to specific knowledge of the spirit soul’s constitutional position and his relationship to the Supreme Soul. 113. What is the the highest perfectional stage of human life? BG 3.41 devotional service of the Lord, and turn the lust into love of Godhead – the highest perfectional stage of human life.
