Prabhup■da: Next verse, go on.
Pradyumna: (leads chanting of verse)
Prabhup■da: Go on.
Pradyumna:
Prabhup■da: Hmm. Bh■mir ■po . . .
Pradyumna:
Prabhup■da:
The duty of human life is to understand God, K■■■a. In the Ved■nta-s■tra, the first aphorism is
ath■to brahma jijñ■s■. Atha■, "therefore." Because we have got this human form of body, so this is
the time for inquiring about the Absolute Truth. In the other life—animal life, beast life, tree life, plant life
. . . there are 8,400,000 different forms of life, and through evolutionary process we have passed
through 8,000,000 forms of life or a few more thousand forms of life, because human beings, they are
of 400,000 forms of life. Just like we have got experience over this planet there are different forms of
life, different system of religion, different system of culture, even though all of them are of human form
life. Similarly, there are other forms of life—aquatics in the water—in the jungle, trees, plants,
mountains; and then insects, reptiles, ants; then birds, flies. Jalaj■ nava-lak■■ni sth■var■
lak■a-vi■■ati (Padma Pur■■a). In the Vi■■u Pur■■a the description is there what are the different
forms of life. Jalaj■ nava-lak■■ni. In the water there are 900,000 forms of life. Who knows that? But in
the Vedic ■■stra everything perfectly calculated given there. This is called Vedic knowledge.
Vedic knowledge means perfect knowledge. There is no . . . (indistinct) . . . who can calculate how
many forms of life are within the ocean. But from the Vedic literature you get just exact
conclusion—900,000 species of life. The botanists, they cannot say how many forms of trees and
plants are there. But in the Vedas you'll find, sth■var■ lak■a-vi■■ati—2,000,000's forms of life, of
trees and plants. Sth■vara. Sth■vara means the living entities which cannot move, stand in one place.
This is a punishment, those who are too much dull. Means . . . dull means cannot understand what is
God. That is dullness. Otherwise for eating, sleeping, sex life and defense there is no need of university
education. Nobody goes to the university to learn how to eat, how to sleep, how to enjoy sex life, how to
defend. There is no education required, because these four kinds of bodily necessities of life are known
even to the animals. ■h■ra-nidr■-bhaya-maithuna■ ca s■m■nyam etat pa■ubhir nar■■■m. How to
eat, the animal knows. Even the newborn child who has no education, no experience, he still . . . even
the cats and dogs, cubs, as soon as born, they find out the nipples of their mother and eat or suck.
Even the eyes are blind at that time, but still he knows where is their food. Similarly, human child also
knows.
So for eating, sleeping, mating and defending, there is no need of education. Education means ath■to
brahma jijñ■s■. That is education. How to know the Supreme Absolute Truth—that is education. But
the university, they are educating people how to eat, how to sleep. Eh? They're manufacturing so many
eatables, different types of eatables, although God has given immense foodstuffs for human society.
Just like these fruits, they're made for human being. They're not eatables for the cats and dogs. They
are meant for human being. So eko bah■n■■ yo vidadh■ti k■m■n (Ka■ha Upani■ad 2.2.13).
K■■■a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, has supplied. He is supplying immense foodstuff for all
living entities. Tena tyaktena bhuñj■th■ (ISO 1). But there is allotment. For the pig, the foodstuff is
stool, and for human being, the foodstuff—fruits, flowers, food grains, milk, sugar. So as God has
allotted, you use that for your eating. Eating is required. Then your life is successful. Tena tyaktena
bhuñj■th■. Do not try to imitate others. Do not try to imitate the hog and the pig to eat stool. That is not
human bodies' foodstuff. You eat your own foodstuff. Tena tyaktena bhuñj■th■■. This is life.
Food is already there, but the difficulty is that we do not know that we should be satisfied with the
foodstuff allotted to us by God. ■■■v■sya. The foodstuff belongs to K■■■a, God. You cannot
manufacture in the factory this nice foodstuff—apple, orange, banana and others, so many hundreds
and thousands. So therefore the only business of human form of life is to inquire about the Absolute
Truth, the Supreme Lord, Supreme Being. That should be our inquiry. That should be the subject
matter of education, not how to eat, how to sleep, how to mate. These things does not require
education. Because the animals, they also know. So everyone knows what is his foodstuff, how to
sleep. When there is . . . you feel sleepy, he does not ask for, "Give me a good apartment, good
bedstead." You'll lie down anywhere and enjoy sleeping. Similarly, how to enjoy sex life, nobody
requires university education. So if we waste our time simply for being enlightened how to manufacture
different types of foodstuff, how to take it on table and chair, nice dishes or plate, that is waste of time. If
you utilize your time for inquiring about the Absolute Truth, that is perfection of human life, not to waste
your time in the animal propensities of life. That is not education; that is not human form of life.
So that education will be complete if you become K■■■a conscious. That is being taught in the
Seventh Chapter by K■■■a Himself. What is that? Mayy ■sakta-mana■ p■rtha: "You have to become
always absorbed or attached on Me," on K■■■a. Mayy ■sakta. ■sakta means attachment. We have
got attachment for so many things. We have got attachment for our family, for our country, for our
society, for our business, for our cats, for our dogs—so many things—but we have no attachment for
K■■■a. That is lacking. Therefore life is imperfect. ■rama eva hi kevalam.
Everyone is performing his duty very nicely. So that is . . . Bh■gavata says, dharma-svanu■■hita■
pu■s■m. Everyone has got his duty, either as a br■hma■a, as a k■atriya, as a vai■ya, as a ■■dra,
as a brahmac■r■, as a g■hastha, v■naprastha, sanny■s■. This is Vedic eight divisions of social life,
human life, var■■■rama-dharma. Unless one comes to this institutional progress of life, var■a and
■■rama, they are animals. Human life begins from these eight divisions of occupational duty. A
br■hma■a must execute his duty, a k■atriya must execute his duty, vai■ya . . . they are all described
in the Bhagavad-g■t■, what are the duties of br■hma■as: satya ■ama■ dama■ titik■■ ■rjava
jñ■nam vijñ■nam ■stikya■ brahma-karma svabh■va-jam (BG 18.42). K■atriya: teja■ ■aurya■
yuddhe ca apal■yanam (BG 18.43). Vai■ya: k■■i-go-rak■ya-v■■ijya■ vai■ya-karma svabh■va-jam
(BG 18.44). ■■dra: paricary■tmaka■ karyam ■■dra-karma svabh■va-jam. Everything is there. So if
everyone discharges his duty properly, then his life becomes successful.
So on the whole, everything is required. The br■hma■a, k■atriya, vai■ya, ■■dra, these are different
divisions, but what for the division is meant for? The division is meant for understanding God, K■■■a.
Ata■ pumbhir dvija-■re■■ha var■■■rama-vibh■ga■a■. These instruction is given in the
■r■mad-Bh■gavatam, that everyone has got a particular type of duty as br■hma■a, k■atriya, vai■ya,
■■dra, brahmac■r■, like that. Ata■ pumbhir dvija-■re■■ha var■■■rama-vibh■ga■a■—division of
var■a and ■■rama. And everyone has got his duty. So how the duty is perfected? How to know that?
That is stated:
Svanu■■hitasya dharmasya. You are acting your duty as a br■hma■a, k■atriya, vai■ya, that's all
right—■■dra—but you have to see whether K■■■a, or God, is satisfied by your duty. If you see that
K■■■a is satisfied by your discharging of duties in a particular position, then you should know that
your life is perfect. Otherwise, ■rama eva hi kevalam (SB 1.2.8): simply undergoing unnecessary
troubles, that's all.
So how you can understand whether K■■■a, or God, is satisfied by discharging your particular type of
duty? That is K■■■a explaining Himself: mayy ■sakta-mana■ p■rtha yoga■ yuñjan mad-■■raya■.
You have to increase your attachment for K■■■a. Mayy ■sakta. ■sakta means attachment. You
should be attached to your business not for the business' sake but for the attachment of K■■■a.
K■■■a is to be satisfied. Generally we do business for my satisfaction, for my family satisfaction, for
government satisfaction, for income tax satisfaction and so many satisfaction. But when you try to
satisfy K■■■a or increase your attachment for His satisfaction, then your business is perfect. Mayy
■sakta-mana■ p■rtha (BG 7.1); svanu■■hitasya dharmasya sa■siddhi . . . (SB 1.2.13) Everyone
wants perfection; otherwise what is the use of jumping like cats and dogs? That is not meant for human
being, unnecessarily jumping and dancing. You must dance for satisfaction of K■■■a. Then your life is
. . . there is tendency of for dancing, for chanting, for singing. They are holding ball dances, and musical
instrument. The same thing we are propagating: chant and dance Hare K■■■a mantra. This is
satisfaction. This is satisfaction. Our movement is not dry. We are simply asking people, "Chant, dance,
eat nice foodstuff, take pras■dam and go home." It is not dry, because the same tendency is there.
Everyone goes to the hotel, everyone goes to the nightclub, eats sumptuously and dances and with
musical instruments enjoys—the same thing—but in connection with K■■■a: you take pras■dam, you
chant, you dance and enjoy life, but in connection with K■■■a, then it is successful. Your life is
successful. That is K■■■a also saying, mayy ■sakta-mana■ p■rtha yoga■ yuñjan mad-■■raya■.
This is a yoga, this K■■■a consciousness movement—the topmost yoga. There are many yog■s, you
might have seen, for gymnastics of the body. That is not perfection of yoga. That is yoga, a kind of
yoga, but there are different kinds of yoga system: bhakti-yoga, jñ■na-yoga, ha■ha-yoga,
dhy■na-yoga, r■ja-yoga, so many. But K■■■a says:
"That yog■'s perfect who's always thinking of Me," mayy ■sakta-mana■. This is being taught. "Always
thinking." And Bhagavad-g■t■, in another place it is said, man-man■ bhava mad-bhakta■ mad-y■j■
m■■ namaskuru mam evai■yasi (BG 9.34). Asa■■aya. The aim of life should be, especially of the
human body, that try to understand K■■■a. And as far as possible . . . K■■■a cannot be understood
fully because He is unlimited, and we have got limited knowledge. But still, as far as possible, as much
as possible, if we try to understand K■■■a, janma karma me divyam eva■ yo vetti tattvata■ (BG 4.9).
K■■■a advents Himself, comes on this planet. He executes so many duties, takes part in so many
occupational functions as human being, but everything is full of instruction. Therefore K■■■a says that
"Don't try to understand, even that is also good superficially, but in truth." Janma karma me divyam yo
j■n■ti tattvata■. Tattvata■ means "in truth," "in fact."
So if anyone . . . janma karma divyam. Divyam means His birth is not ordinary birth. If it had been
ordinary birth, then why we are still performing the Janm■■■am■ ceremony, K■■■a's birthday
ceremony? Many big, big kings came and gone. Who is performing the birthday ceremony of that king?
But we perform according to Vedic system the birthday ceremony of Lord R■macandra. Nowadays we
have imitated so many other birthday ceremony, but in the ■■stra it is enjoined the birthday ceremony
of the advent of God should be observed. The birthday ceremony of God is called jayant■. That is
special constellation of the stars. But now the jayant■ has been used for so many rascals and fools.
This is not ■■stric. So because K■■■a's janma and ordinary man's janma is not the same thing,
therefore K■■■a says, janma karma me divyam. Divyam means transcendental, not material. Not
material. It is spiritual, or transcendental, divyam. Janma karma me divyam yo j■n■ti tattvata■. Still
you have to learn it in truth.
So if you learn this science, simply to understand why K■■■a advents, why K■■■a takes part in the
Battlefield of Kuruk■etra or in other activities just like an human being . . . why? If you try to understand
this fact . . . that can be known. They are all mentioned in the ■■stra. The s■dhus, they know; guru, he
knows. So if you want to be learned in the science you can become, because ■■stra is there, guru is
there and s■dhu is there. S■dhu-■■stra-guru-v■kya. Then you will be able to understand what is
K■■■a, why He advents, why His activities are transcendental. So if you try to understand these
things, then what will be the result? Result will be tyaktv■ deha■ punar janma naiti (BG 4.9). After
giving up this body, no more material body. No more material body means no more death. The death
takes place on account of this material body; otherwise a living entity, nitya■ ■■■vato 'ya■ na hanyate
hanyam■ne ■ar■re (BG 2.20). Living entity is eternal; he does not die, he does not take birth. Na
j■yate mriyate v■ kad■cit. Eternal. Then why he dies? That death is of this material body, not of the
eternal soul. So although we are eternal, nitya■ ■■■vata■, still we have to accept different types of
body. Bh■tv■ bh■tv■ pral■yate (BG 8.19). Dehino'smin yath■ dehe kaum■ra■ yauvana■ jar■ (BG
2.13).
So this transmigration of the soul from one body to another is not very good business. Who wants to
die? Nobody wants to die. But he has to die. He must die. There is no question of he likes or not likes.
Nobody wants to take birth, again enter into the womb of mother. And nowadays it is very risky,
because mother is killing the child: now the ultimate end of Kali-yuga. The mother's shelter, a child feels
very happy on the lap of mother, and that is the arrangement of nature. Mother should take care of the
child. But in this age the people are so, I mean to say, contaminated that even mother is killing child.
Just imagine what is the position of birth and death. Birth and death is not very good business.
Therefore if you want to stop this birth and death, then take to K■■■a consciousness, try to
understand K■■■a.
Punar janma naiti. You can stop your birth and death. And if you stop your birth and death, then you
stop your disease and old age. That eternity—you are eternal. You get your eternal life. Na hanyate
hanyam■ne ■ar■re (BG 2.20). We eternal . . . even if we get this material body, even though we
change this material body, just like I was a baby, you were a baby, but that body is no longer existing. I
am in different body, still I am existing. Therefore, na hanyate hanyam■ne ■ar■re (BG 2.20). Although
the body has changed, I am not changed. This is my position. Therefore perfection of life is to keep
oneself in his original, constitutional position, not to change body. But that is possible. How it is
possible? Tyaktv■ deha■ punar janma naiti m■m eti kaunteya (BG 4.9). Everything is there. How it is
possible?
If you want to go to the higher planetary system by pious activities, you can go there, y■nti deva-vrat■
dev■n. You can go to the planet where Lord Brahm■ lives or where Indra lives or Candra lives. The
modern process, by taking a sputnik or jet, you can go to the moon planet. But that you can go.
Whether you can go or not go, that is up to you. But you cannot stay there. That is not possible. If you
want to stay there, then y■nti deva-vrat■ dev■n. You have to prepare yourself by worshiping that
particular deva or deity, demigod; then you will be admitted. Just like if you want to go to a foreign
country you have to take the permission of the immigration department, visa, then you can go. If that
law is there in this planet, why not for other planet? How you can go abruptly, by force? That is not
possible. Y■nti deva-vrat■ dev■n. You have to prepare yourself to go. You can go there. But after this
life, if you are sufficiently prepared to enter that particular type of planet, you can go there. Similarly,
you can go to the planet where K■■■a lives. Mad-y■jino 'pi y■nti m■m (BG 9.25).
So what is the difference between going to the higher planetary systems, heavenly planet, and going to
the planet where K■■■a lives? The difference is, yad gatv■ na nivartante tad dh■ma parama■ mama
(BG 15.6). If you go to the planet where K■■■a lives, then you haven't got to come back again.
Otherwise, in other planets, in the heavenly planets, k■■■e pu■ye punar martya-loka■ vi■anti. You
can live there, just like you can live in a foreign country so long your visa continues. Simply . . .
similarly, you can go to the higher, heavenly planets, but you can live there up to the point of visa,
pu■ya. By pious activities you can go to the higher planetary system, but impious activities, you go to
the lower planetary. Adho gacchanti t■mas■■. Adho gacchanti t■mas■■, jaghanya-gu■a-v■tti-sth■,
■rdhva■ gacchanti sattva-sth■ (BG 14.18). So even if you go ■rdhva-lokam,
brahma-lokam—■-brahma-bhuvan■l lok■■ punar ■vartinao 'rjuna (BG 8.16)—you have to come back
again. But, yad gatv■ na nivartante, tad dh■ma parama■ mama (BG 15.6). If you go to that planet,
yad gatv■ na nivartante, one does not require to come back again. "That is My real abode." Tad
dh■ma paramam. Every dh■ma is K■■■a's, but that is the parama dh■ma, supreme dh■ma. Just
like the king: the kingdom belongs to the king, but still he has got a special royal house, palace.
Similarly, K■■■a is the proprietor of all planets, sarva-loka-mahe■varam (BG 5.29), but still He has
got His own planet. That is called Gokula V■nd■vana.
So this K■■■a consciousness movement is a movement to educate people how he can go back to
home, back to Godhead, K■■■a. So our request is that you take advantage of this movement. Don't
be fully simply absorbed in the activities of animal life—eating, sleeping, mating and defending. This is
also required, but under regulation. Eating is not prohibited in K■■■a consciousness movement, but
eating is regulated. Don't eat anything without K■■■a's pras■dam. Oh, K■■■a pras■dam, there are
so many varieties nice foodstuff. Be satisfied taking K■■■a's pras■dam, so your eating problem will
be solved and you will advance in K■■■a consciousness to go back to home, back to Godhead. So
this K■■■a consciousness movement is very important movement for the human society, and this is
not a utopianan thing. It is authorized. For every action of K■■■a consciousness movement there is
support from Veda, Vedic literature. Just like whenever we speak something we immediately give
evidence from the Bhagavad-g■t■. It is not that something, "In my opinion it is . . ." No. We have no
opinion. We don't give our opinion. We present Bhagavad-g■t■ as it is, that's all. As K■■■a says, we
say the same thing. We have no difficulty. K■■■a says, matta■ paratara■ n■nyat, kiñcid asti
dhanañjaya (BG 7.7). "There is no more superior truth than K■■■a," K■■■a says. We accept that.
We preach that, that K■■■a is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. K■■■as tu bhagav■n svayam
(SB 1.3.28). If you are searching after God, that is your duty. Ath■to brahma jijñ■s■. That is your
human life's business, to search out the truth, Absolute Truth. Then that is K■■■a, that is K■■■a.
In the Ved■nta-s■tra it is indirectly said: "The Absolute Truth is janm■dy asya yata■ (SB 1.1.1), from
whom everything is generated." That is Absolute Truth. That answer is given in the Bhagavad-g■t■,
aham sarvasya prabhava■ matta■ sarva■ pravartate (BG 10.8): "I am the origin of everything." Aham
■dir hi dev■n■m (BG 10.2). Somebody may say the demigods like Lord Brahm■, ■iva, they are the
beginning demigod. But K■■■a says, aham ■dir hi dev■n■m: "They, all the demigods, but their
beginning, they are also coming from Me." Sarvasya prabhava■ matta■ sarva■ pravartate. These
things are there. So we are teaching that. It is not difficult. We are not manufacturing anything by fertile
brain. Everything is there in the Bhagavad-g■t■, and we are presenting Bhagavad-g■t■ as it is,
preaching the Bhagavad-g■t■ as it is. The Bh■gavata is also further explanation of Bhagavad-g■t■,
Ved■nta-s■tra explanation.
So we have got immense literature. We have already published more than twenty books. If you want to
understand the Absolute Truth by philosophy, by science, there are books. Otherwise, the easy method
is chant Hare K■■■a: Hare K■■■a, Hare K■■■a, K■■■a K■■■a, Hare Hare/ Hare R■ma, Hare
R■ma, R■ma R■ma, Hare Hare. So God has given you the tongue, and it doesn't matter whether you
are Indian or American or Englishman, German or African. Everyone can chant Hare K■■■a mantra.
That is actually being done. In Africa they are chanting Hare K■■■a mantra. In Australia they are
chanting Hare K■■■a mantra. In Europe they are chanting Hare K■■■a mantra. Asia they are
accustomed to chant Hare K■■■a mantra. The chanting of Hare K■■■a mantra is going on all over
the world. Take advantage of it. Don't miss this opportunity, and make your life successful.
Thank you very much. Hare K■■■a. (pause) Any questions? Any questions?
Devotee: Does anyone have any questions? Feel free to ask if you do.
Prabhup■da: No questions? Everything understood? No difficulty in understanding? Tad viddhi
pra■ip■tena paripra■nena sevay■ (BG 4.34). Try to clear if it is not understood. I have spoken nothing
which is not understandable, but still, if you have not understood, you can put your question. Hmm. All
right, then chant Hare K■■■a. If you have any question, you can ask.
Indian man: Five thousand years . . . (indistinct) . . . Satya-yuga, Treta, Dv■para, Kali-yuga. This
Kali-yuga is going on now. After how more many years will . . . (indistinct)?
Prabhup■da: Four hundred and twenty-seven thousands of years. The complete age of Kali-yuga is
432,000's of years. Out of that, the Kali-yuga has begun from the date of Battle of Kuruk■etra,
historical. So we have passed 5,000 years from the date of Battle of Kuruk■etra. Therefore (sic)
432,000's of years minus 5,000's of years, it, the remaining age— 427,000's of years. This is practically
the beginning of Kali-yuga. Now the more the age of Kali-yuga will increase, the sufferings of Kali-yuga
also will increase. At the end of Kali-yuga there will be no food supply. There will be no more food grain,
no more fruits, no more milk, no more sugar. These things are stated. And everyone will be obliged to
take meat and roots. Gradually the condition of the people will be so dull that they'll not be able to
understand what is God. At the present, even in the beginning, even 5,000 years have passed, people
cannot understand actually what is God. A vague idea. They do not know actually what is the nature of
God. So gradually it will be forgotten. But still, because still people have got some sense, therefore this
preaching work is going on. At the end they will be all nonsense, just like animals.
Therefore there will be another incarnation, Kalki, at the end of Kali-yuga. He'll simply kill the whole
population. What is that?
Mleccha. Mleccha means misbehaved. As we say—mleccha, yavana. One who does not follow the
Vedic principles, they are called mlecchas. And those who are meat-eaters, they are called yavana,
mleccha, yavana. This is the meaning of mleccha, yavana. It is not a particular class of men. Anyone
who eats meat, he's a yavana, and anyone who does not live to the standard of Vedic understanding,
he is a mleccha. So everyone will become mleccha. So mleccha-nivaha-nidhane kalayasi karav■lam.
The Lord will become very much vicious. Ati karav■lam. Just like dh■maketuh, comet. Dh■maketum
iva kim api kar■lam nidhane. Mleccha-nidhane. That will be the only remedy—to kill all the mlecchas.
The avat■ra, Kalki avat■ra, will come. Ke■ava dh■ta buddha ■ar■ra, ah, ke■ava dh■ta kalki
■ar■ra.
Buddha ■ar■ra is also, ke■ava dh■ta buddha ■ar■ra, to give protection to the poor animals. Lord
Buddha appeared to stop animal-killing. Sadaya-h■daya-dar■ita-pa■u-gh■tam, nindasi yajña-vidher
ahaha ■ruti-j■ta■ (Da■■vat■ra Stotra 9). Lord Buddha, he declined to accept Vedic authority. Why?
Because in the Vedas also there is sanction sometimes in yajña, animal sacrifice. But he wanted to
stop animal sacrifice, or animal-killing. Therefore he denied the authority of Vedas. Because people will
give evidence that "You are preaching no animal-killing, but in the Vedas sometimes in sacrifice the
animals are sacrificed. How you can stop this?" Therefore Lord Buddha had to deny the authority of
Vedas. That is described, nindasi yajña-vidher. The animal-killing is there in the Vedas in the
yajña-vidher, not in the slaughterhouse. In the yajña-vidher. That also was decried. Nindasi
yajña-vidher ahaha ■ruti-j■tam. Because according to Vedic civilization, ■ruti, Veda, is the evidence.
Therefore if Lord Buddha accepts the authority of Vedas, he cannot say, "Stop animal-killing." Then he
said, "No. I do not follow Vedic principles." Therefore he is called n■stika. Anyone who denies the
authority of Vedas, he is called n■stika. ■r■ Caitanya Mah■prabhu therefore says, veda n■ m■niy■
bauddha haya ta' n■stika. On account of denying the authority of Vedas, the Bauddhas became
n■stika. Ved■■raya n■stikya-v■da bauddhake adhika (CC Madhya 6.168). And those who are
lip-sympathy ved■—"I am following Vedic principles" but doing all nonsense—they are lower than
these n■stika. Lower than the n■stika. Veda n■ m■niy■ bauddha haya n■stika.
So Lord Buddha appeared to stop animal-killing, ahi■s■ para . . . (indistinct) . . . He did not say
anything more. His only mission was, "Let these rascals first of all stop this animal-killing, they'll
understand further about spiritual advancement." Those who are animal killer, they cannot understand
anything about spiritual advancement. That is not possible. Therefore this thing must be stopped first.
That is Buddha philosophy. But in spite of that . . . (break) (end)
