(translated into French throughout)
Nit■i: O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. (devotees repeat) (leads
chanting of verse, etc.)
Translation: "Now hear, O son of P■th■, Arjuna, how by practicing yoga in full consciousness of Me,
with mind attached to Me, you can know Me in full, free from doubt."
Prabhup■da:
We are speaking from Bhagavad-g■t■. I think most of you know this book, Bhagavad-g■t■. The
Bhagavad-g■t■ is sometimes translated in foreign languages, "The Song of God." In other words, God
Himself speaking. So far we are concerned, we cannot understand God by mental speculation. Even in
this material world, we cannot understand what is there in the planetary system.
So our knowledge is very, very limited. Besides that, we have got four deficiencies. The one deficiency
is that we commit mistake. Anyone, any big man of this material world, he commits mistake. Besides
that, he is illusioned. Illusioned means to accept something what is not fact. Just like . . . (coughs)
(aside) Water. We accept this body as self. This is called illusion. According to Vedic understanding,
anyone who thinks of this body as the self, he's animal. Just like a dog, he thinks that he is the body,
similarly, if a man thinks that he is this body—he is American or Indian or Frenchman or German or
Hindu or Muslim, with this bodily concept of life—so, according to Vedic understanding, this conception
is animal conception. So this is called illusion.
Then next item is cheating. Cheating means with imperfect knowledge one takes the place of a teacher.
And the last deficiency is that our senses are imperfect. It is not independent, still, we are very much
proud of our senses. For example, atheist class of men, they say that, "Can you show me God?" He
does not think whether he has got any power to see. So far our eyes are concerned, we can see so
long when the conditions are fulfilled. Just like here we are speaking. As soon as the light will be off, we
cannot see one another. So what is the value of these eyes? You simply see under certain condition.
You simply smell under certain condition. You can hear under certain condition. So therefore your
materialistic life is conditional life.
So with these imperfect senses, we cannot understand what is God. The only sense is very, I mean to .
. . usable, just is this ear. Just like man is sleeping, and some enemy has come to attack him or to kill
him. So still he's nicely sleeping. But if some friend cries, "Mr. Such-and-such, wake up, wake up! Here
is enemy. He'll kill you, kill you!" he can rise up. So when all other senses are useless, the ear can
work. Therefore, to understand God, we have to use this ear. And we have to receive the sound
vibration and it will act.
So as you are all ladies and gentleman interested in the yoga system, so the first-class yoga system is
bhakti-yoga. In this Bhagavad-g■t■, just now I am trying to explain the first verse of the Seventh
Chapter. The Seventh Chapter begins after concluding the Sixth Chapter. In the Sixth Chapter, the
yoga system has been explained. It is said that one has to select a very sacred, secluded place. He has
to sit down there in a posture just like a perpendicular, a straight line, the neck and the body. And then
he has to think of K■■■a, or Vi■■u. The thinking should be so careful that one cannot divert his
attention to any other subject matter. In the P■tañjali yoga system, it is said, yoga indriya-sa■yama:
yoga means to control all the senses. Because unless the senses are controlled, the mind will be
flickering, go this way, that way, that way. So mind is the leader of all other senses. If you control the
mind, concentrate on the feature of the Supreme Lord, that is the yoga system. The, in the . . .
therefore, describing the yoga system, K■■■a prescribes so many methods, but after hearing the
system of practicing yoga, Arjuna replied that, "K■■■a, this system is so difficult I cannot practice it."
So point is that Arjuna was not ordinary person. He was specifically friend of K■■■a. So he said that
"This practice of yoga, ha■ha-yoga, is not possible by me." So K■■■a therefore concluded the yoga
system that, "Don't be discertained. There is another yoga system, bhakti-yoga system. You can adopt
it." The bhakti-yoga is summarized in the Sixth Chapter of Bhagavad-g■t■:
(aside) You find out this last verse of the Sixth Chapter.
Pu■■a K■■■a: Last verse of Sixth Chapter.
Prabhup■da: This here.
Pu■■a K■■■a: Forty-seven.
Prabhup■da: Yogin■m api sarve■■■ mad-gaten■ntar-■tman■. So this is the topmost system of
yoga, bhakti-yoga, always thinking of K■■■a. So that system, bhakti-yoga system, is being described
in the Seventh Chapter as:
"My dear Arjuna, the . . ." Mayy ■sakta-man■■: "Just try to divert your attachment to Me." Attachment,
we have got attachment. Everyone has got attachment to something. So this yoga system, bhakti-yoga
system, means simply divert the attachment to K■■■a. That's all. When the mind is fully diverted for
increasing attachment of K■■■a, that is called bhakti-yoga.
So yoga■ yuñjan mad-■■raya■. This yoga system should be practiced, the mad-■■raya . . .
mad-■■raya means "Under My direct supervision." This yoga system means it is not
impersonal—personal. And therefore the word is used, bhagav■n uv■ca: "The Supreme Personality of
Godhead said." Bhagav■n, the Absolute Truth, He's a person. Sometimes we think . . . there are many,
they think the Absolute Truth is impersonal. But the Absolute Truth is person. Impersonal realization of
the Absolute Truth is partial. It is not complete realization. Therefore it is mentioned here, asa■■ayam,
"without any doubt," and samagram, "in full." After all, yoga system means an endeavor to understand
the Absolute Truth. Yoga means linking, connecting. So when you connect with the Absolute Truth, that
is called yoga.
Yoga . . . another meaning is "plus," adding something else. Just like two plus two. This is also called
yoga. Similarly, God is one; I am also one. When we join together, that is called yoga. There are many
methods of yoga practice, but the direct method is bhakti-yoga. I am a person, and God is also a
person. When we intermingle together, or we join together, that is called bhakti-yoga. Bhakti means the
process of connecting with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As soon as we use the word bhakti,
means the process of devotion, there must be bhakta and Bhagav■n. The Bhagav■n is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and bhakta is Arjuna. So Bhagav■n is personally teaching Arjuna the process
how he can understand Him fully and without any doubt. Therefore it is mentioned here, bhagav■n
uv■ca. Bhagav■n uv■ca means "The Supreme Personality of Godhead said."
So the Absolute Truth is realized in three angle of vision. It is said in the Vedic literature:
The Absolute Truth is the ultimate truth, tattva. Tattva means Absolute Truth. So those who are aware
of the Absolute Truth, they say that Absolute Truth is one, but He's realized in three angle of vision,
namely, Brahman, Param■tm■ and Bhagav■n. Those who are trying to speculate and understand the
Absolute Truth, they can reach up to impersonal Brahman. So generally, speculators means big, big
philosophers. They can understand that impersonal Brahman. These impersonalists are generally
known as jñ■n■s. Jñ■n■s means the wise men or persons who are very much aware of everything.
So they can understand the impersonal feature of the Absolute Truth. But there are other class, who
are called yog■s. The yog■s can understand the Param■tm■ feature of the Absolute Truth.
Param■tm■ means the Supersoul, who is situated within everyone's heart. And the personal feature of
the Lord is realized by the bhaktas, or the devotees.
So the jñ■n■s and the yog■s, they cannot understand perfectly what is God. God is transcendental,
sat-cit-■nanda, combination of eternity, knowledge and blissfulness. So if we realize the Absolute Truth
partially, simply the eternity knowledge, that is called brahma-jñ■na. And when one is further advanced
and he realizes the Absolute Truth as the localized aspect, Param■tm■, or Lord Vi■■u within
anyone's heart, by the yogic practice, that is called param■tma-jñ■na, or knowledge of the Absolute
Truth. Actually, the objective is one, but different degrees of understanding.
One example can be given in this connection: Just like the sun globe and the sun-god and the
sunshine. The sunshine is also light, and there is temperature; and the sun globe is also light, and there
is temperature; and the sun-god within the sun globe, there is the personality known as sun-god, that is
also light and temperature. But all this light and temperature, there are degrees. The sunshine degree
of temperature light is less than the sun globe, and the sun globe temperature light is less than the
sun-god. So when you reach the sun-god, then you understand the complete temperature and light.
That completeness is realized by this word bhagav■n. Therefore the words are used here, asa■■aya■
samagram: "You can understand Me in full, asa■■ayam, and without any doubt." So if you are
interested to understand the Absolute Truth, God, then you must take to bhakti-yoga. And if we want to
understand the Absolute Truth with some doubt, and not in complete, then we may take jñ■na-yoga or
dhy■na-yoga.
So our this K■■■a consciousness movement is meant for understanding the Absolute Truth in
complete, without any doubt and without any incompleteness. This is also confirmed in the Eighteenth
Chapter, that if you want to know God in completeness and without any doubt, then you have to take to
bhakti-yoga process. It is said:
The meaning is that, "One can understand Me only by this bhakti-yoga process. And when one is fully
aware of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, then he becomes fit to enter into the kingdom of God."
So the purpose of yoga practice is to promote, or to leave this material atmosphere, and enter into the
spiritual atmosphere, all the yog■s. The jñ■na-yog■s, they remain in the impersonal feature of the
Absolute Truth; the dhy■na-yoga is practicing the localized aspect; but the bhakti-yog■, he is promoted
directly in the planet which is called Goloka V■nd■vana, and there he associates with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and enjoys life blissfully, eternally.
So there are different planetary systems within this material world. Just like we are situated, it is called
Bh■rloka. Above this, there is Bhuvarloka. Above that, there is Svarloka, there is Janaloka, there is
Maharloka, Satyaloka. In this way, there are seven steps of planetary system up, and similarly, seven
planetary system down. So by jñ■na-yoga, by bhakti-yoga . . . dhy■na-yoga, means mystic yoga
system, we can be promoted to the planetary system, but if you practice the bhakti-yoga, then you go to
the transcendental world directly and associate with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The
dhy■na-yog■ and jñ■na-yog■ can also go to the Brahmaloka or brahma-jyotir, but there is chance of
falling down again to this material world.
But generally, jñ■na-yog■ remains a speculator within this material world, and dhy■na-yog■, they, as
soon as they get some material miracle power, they become implicated with this power, no more going
to the spiritual world. But bhakti-yog■, being perfectly the yog■, the topmost yog■, he can enter the
kingdom of God, or the planet where God is there. God is everywhere, but He has got a special planet,
which is called Goloka V■nd■vana. You can enter there and mix with the Supreme Lord just like we
are here mixing one another, I can see you, you can see me. Similarly, you can go directly, see God
and live with Him, dance with Him, play with Him, eat with Him. That is the perfection of life.
This perfection of yoga can be achieved by practicing bhakti-yoga as it is recommended here, mayy
■sakta-man■■ p■rtha yoga■ yuñjan mad-■■raya■: under the guidance of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead or His representative, bona fide. If you practice this yoga, then you can understand the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in complete, without any doubt. And if you practice this yoga in this
life, and try to understand K■■■a, what He is, then, after giving up this body—you have to give up this
body, today or tomorrow—then you go directly to K■■■a. It is therefore explained in the Fourth
Chapter, janma karma me divya■ yo j■n■ti tattvata■ punar janma naiti m■m eti kaunteya (BG 4.9):
"My dear Arjuna, anyone, if he simply tries to understand why I come in this material world, what is My
mission, what do I do, if he simply one understands, then he immediately becomes fit for being
transferred to the spiritual world."
So our K■■■a consciousness movement is to educate people how to understand K■■■a, and then
make his life perfect.
Thank you very much.
Devotees: Jaya Prabhup■da. (break)
Prabhup■da: Any question?
Translator: (translating question from guest) So he's saying that many people are wondering why we
are making so much propaganda for our K■■■a conscious movement. Because usually India doesn't
make propaganda for philosophy.
Prabhup■da: He does not know what is India. In India, he'll see, village to village, they're chanting Hare
K■■■a. In every village, in every town, there is a place which is called hari-sabh■. Or every
neighborhood, there is . . . now, after the British rule, they have forgotten this culture, but they,
originally, every village, every town, there is a club or society where this Hare K■■■a chanting is going
on. And besides that, five hundred years ago, when Caitanya Mah■prabhu was there, He, all over
India, He traveled and preached this sa■k■rtana movement. Not only that, He has ordered to His
followers, to His devotees . . . not only devotees; He has ordered to every Indian to preach the
sa■k■rtana movement all over the world. So He has said in these words that,
Means "Anyone who has taken birth in India as human being, he must make his life perfect and preach
this cult all over the world." And He has also said:
Means that, "As many villages and towns are there on the surface of the globe, everywhere this Hare
K■■■a mantra will be preached." So this Hare K■■■a movement, or K■■■a consciousness, has just
begun. You will see in future, in every village, every town, they'll chant and dance. So it is the Caitanya
Mah■prabhu's prediction that is being fulfilled. Nobody can check it. Already we have got about
hundred branches all over the world, and all kinds of people taking part to this movement. (break)
Translator: So his question is that how can Catholic people, without rejecting their own religion, take to
K■■■a consciousness.
Prabhup■da: Well, it is not rejecting, it is reforming. The Catholic religion also teaches love of God, or
love of Christ. So if I say the truth, it will not be very palatable, but this movement is reformation. But
another thing is, Catholic, Hindu, Muslim, or whatever you may be, everyone accepts there is God. So
we are teaching not to formally accept there is God, but know what is God and love Him. So those who
are interested for higher knowledge of God, they'll take it. The point is simply officially to accept God,
there is God—no. You know what is God, what is His feature, what He is doing, what He is acting, what
is His name, where His address. Everything you know, and try to love Him. That we are teaching.
So those who are actually serious to know about God, they'll come to this movement. And those who
simply know God officially: "There is God, that's all," that is different thing. That is also good. But if you
want to know more, then you have to take this K■■■a consciousness. We are therefore presenting
these books, eighty books, four hundred pages each, and just to explain what is God. So it is a great
science. Any intelligent man will appreciate. And we are getting good response. Especially in America,
big, big university, college, professors, they are now purchasing. We have proposed to publish
■r■mad-Bh■gavatam in sixty volumes, but we have published only fourteen. But still, the big, big
professors, they are giving us order, forward order, for all the sixty volumes. As soon as scholarly
people, they read these books, they'll welcome this movement all over the world.
Is that all right, or any more? Any more question?
Translator: She would like to know if our religion can bring something more than the other religions.
Prabhup■da: There is one religion. One who knows God, he is religious. One who does not know God,
that religion has no meaning. Religion means to understand the order of God. That is religion. But if you
do not know what is God, and how you can hear His order? So religion without understanding of God
philosophically and logically is sentiment. And philosophy without understanding of God is mental
speculation. So when philosophy and religious sentiments combine, that is called religion. Otherwise, it
is not religion.
Bhagav■n: Have k■rtana?
Prabhup■da: Yes. (end)
