Prabhup■da: Who has taken your Deity?
B■rabhadra: Who has taken Him? I don't know. Somebody, they broke in the house, they took one
typewriter and the sewing machine, and I think it's . . .
Prabhup■da: Who? Typewriter? When?
Tam■la K■■■a: Last night. Yesterday we just got a new sewing machine . . .
Prabhup■da: Heh?
Tam■la K■■■a: . . . a very expensive sewing machine, and they stole it.
Prabhup■da: Sewing machine?
Tam■la K■■■a: And a typewriter. It was taken from the house.
Revat■nandana: While we were at Griffith Park with k■rtana party they broke into our house and took
it.
Tam■la K■■■a: Yes.
Prabhup■da: So that quarter is not nice?
Tam■la K■■■a: No, it's not a nice quarter. So we'll take more precautions now.
Prabhup■da: Somebody must remain always.
Tam■la K■■■a: Okay.
Prabhup■da: That is the only precaution.
Tam■la K■■■a: Yes, that's what I was thinking.
Prabhup■da: I think in our apartment also somebody must remain. Here, this is . . . in New York also I
lost my typewriter, tape recorder. In 72nd St. at daytime, at nine o'clock. I went to take my meals in Dr.
Mishra's place at about nine, and when I came back we saw the door is broken. That superintendent,
he was a Negro. He has done, I know that. This is very common case here. You purchased new
machine and new . . .?
Tam■la K■■■a: The tape recorder . . . I mean the sewing machine was ■■lavat■'s. She has sent it
down here with Dine■a. Two or three hours before, I had just gotten it.
Prabhup■da: Your tape recorder also?
Dine■a: No. I had brought the sewing machine from ■■lavat■ in San Francisco. Yes. This sewing
machine.
Prabhup■da: And typewriter, whose?
Tam■la K■■■a: The typewriter was mine. I'd just . . . Puru■ottama had just brought it from New York
from my parents to me. So less than a week, and they both are gone.
Prabhup■da: New typewriter?
Tam■la K■■■a: Well, it was practically new. It was a very good typewriter.
Prabhup■da: What is the maker?
Tam■la K■■■a: Olivetti. It's the portable.
Prabhup■da: Olivetti portable.
Tam■la K■■■a: Yes. A good one. But the sewing machine is very expensive. It may be 150 dollars,
Govinda d■s■: 163 dollars.
Tam■la K■■■a: 163 dollars. Very good.
Prabhup■da: So we have to take care. What can be done? Now you should be very careful, and
somebody must remain there always.
Govinda d■s■: We live in a very good quarter, though. They live by Watts, and that's the . . . they live
by Watts district, and Watts district is very notorious. There were seven-day riots of shooting and Negro
revolts there about two years ago, three years ago. We live in a very nice quarter, but where they're
living is in a very bad place.
Prabhup■da: So you will continue to live there? (chuckles)
Tam■la K■■■a: Yes, it's in . . . (indistinct) . . . it's not directly in the worst area. It's not in Watts county.
It's in a different area, but still . . . where you live is very good, though. I don't think there would be any
theft. More safe.
Prabhup■da: Yes. It appears very respectable quarter.
All right. Read.
Tam■la K■■■a: "Sañjaya said, Seeing Arjuna full of compassion and very sorrowful, his eyes
brimming with tears, Madhus■dana, K■■■a, spoke the following words. (BG 2.1)
"The Supreme Personality said: 'My dear Arjuna, how have these impurities come upon you? They are
not at all befitting a man who knows the progressive values of life. They do not lead to higher planets,
but to infamy (BG 2.2).' Purport . . ."
Prabhup■da: Now, Arjuna was sympathetic with his brothers and relatives, and he was practically
crying, with tears in his eyes, and K■■■a said that it is non-■ryan. It is not befitting for an ■ryan. Just
see. He was so compassionate, but still, it is not approved by K■■■a.
Go on.
Tam■la K■■■a: Purport: "The Sanskrit word Bhagav■n is explained by the great authority Par■■ara
Muni, the father of Vy■sadeva. The Supreme Personality who possesses all riches, entire strength,
entire fame, entire beauty, entire knowledge and entire renunciation is called Bhagav■n. There are
many persons who are very rich, very powerful, very beautiful, very famous, very learned and very
much detached, but no one can claim that he is possessor of all these opulences entirely."
"Such a claim is applicable to K■■■a only, and as such He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
No living entity, including Brahm■, can possess such opulence. Neither Lord ■iva nor even N■r■ya■a
can possess such opulence as fully as K■■■a."
"By analytical study of such possessions it is concluded in the Brahma-sa■hit■ by Lord Brahm■
himself that Lord K■■■a is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Nobody is equal to or above Him. He
is the primeval Lord, or Bhagav■n, known as Govinda, and He is the supreme cause of all causes. It is
stated as follows:"
"There are many personalities possessing the qualities of Bhagav■n, but K■■■a is supreme over all of
them because none can excel Him. He is the Supreme Person and His body is eternal, full of
knowledge and bliss. He is the primeval Lord Govinda and the cause of all causes."
"In the Bh■gavatam also there is a list of many incarnations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
but K■■■a is described therein as the original Personality from whom many, many incarnations and
Personalities of Godhead expand. It is stated in this way:"
"All the lists of the incarnations of Godhead submitted herewith are either plenary expansions or parts
of the plenary expansions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but K■■■a is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead Himself. Therefore K■■■a is the original Supreme Personality of Godhead,
the Absolute Truth, the source of both Supersoul and the impersonal Brahman."
"In the presence of the Supreme Person, Arjuna's lamentation for his kinsmen is certainly unbecoming,
and therefore K■■■a expressed His surprise with the word kutas, 'wherefrom.' Such unmanly
sentiments were never expected from a person belonging to the civilized class of men known as
■ryans."
"The word ■ryan is applicable to persons who know the value of life and have a civilization based on
spiritual realization. Persons who are led by the material conception of life do not know that the aim of
life is realization of the Absolute Truth, Vi■■u, or Bhagav■n. Such persons are captivated by the
external features . . ."
Prabhup■da: But at the present moment they claim that, "We belong to the ■ryan family," but they
have not the qualification of an ■ryan. The ■ryan qualification is described there. Simply Arjuna was
little flickering, he showed his little weakness, and he was at once condemned as non-■ryan, "Oh, you
are just showing your symptom of a non-■ryan." You see. And by K■■■a. But, the ■ryan word is not
ordinary. To become ■ryan means a perfect human being, as far as possible. That is ■ryan civilization.
Go on.
Tam■la K■■■a: "Such persons are captivated by the external features of the material world, and
therefore they do not know what liberation is. Persons who have no knowledge of liberation from
material bondage are called non-■ryans. Arjuna was trying to deviate from his prescribed duties,
declining to fight, although he was a k■atriya, or warrior.
"This act of cowardice is described as befitting the non-■ryans. Such deviation from duty does not help
one in the progress of spiritual life, nor does it even give one the opportunity of becoming famous in this
world. Lord K■■■a did not approve of the so-called compassion of Arjuna for his kinsmen."
Prabhup■da: So-called compassion. He was thinking that by showing that compassion he'll be, I mean
to say, eulogized by K■■■a. But K■■■a condemned it. Yes. Just the opposite. In other words,
K■■■a is very strict also. That is the qualification of K■■■a and His associates.
Vajr■d api ka■hora and kusum■d api kamala. Softer than the flower and harder than the thunderbolt.
Two sides. When K■■■a is strict He's harder than the thunderbolt, and when He's soft, He's softer
than the flower. These two examples are given. Vajr■d api ka■hora, kusum■d api kamala.
So K■■■a is not lenient to His friend or to His devotee. Because that leniency will not help him. Will
not help him. Sometimes He appears to be very hard for the devotee, but He's not hard. Just like father
sometimes becomes very strict. That is good. That will be proved, how K■■■a's hardness will prove
his salvation. At the end Arjuna will admit, "By Your mercy, my illusion is now over."
So this sort of stricture by . . . from God on the devotee is sometimes misunderstood. Because we are
always accustomed to accept what is immediately very pleasing, but sometimes we'll find that we are
not getting which is immediately very pleasing. But we should not be disappointed. We shall stick to
K■■■a. That is Arjuna's position.
Go on.
Tam■la K■■■a: "O son of P■th■, do not yield to this degrading impotence." (BG 2.3)
Prabhup■da: Hmm. Degrading impotence. He doesn't want to see (chuckling) His devotee a coward
and impotent. So this so-called qualification, impotency and niggard, that is not qualification for
devotee. He must be very, in every way, very expert and fit. K■■■a wants to see. Yes.
Go on.
Tam■la K■■■a: "It does not become you. Give up such petty weakness of heart and arise, O
chastiser of the enemy."
Prabhup■da: He's specially addressing, "Chastiser of the enemy." Where there is no excuse, you must
be chastiser. Not that, "Because I have become K■■■a conscious, I'll be very humble." You must be
humble, but in need, if there is need, you shall be thunderbolt. That is K■■■a instructing.
Tam■la K■■■a: "Arjuna said: O killer of Madhu, K■■■a, how can I counterattack with arrows in battle
personalities like Bh■■ma and Dro■a, who are worthy of my worship?" (BG 2.4)
Prabhup■da: Of course, all explanation are not there. Here, these words, K■■■a addressed Arjuna,
"chastiser of enemies." And Arjuna addresses K■■■a, "Madhus■dana," or the killer of the demon
Madhu. "Yes, You are addressing me as chastiser of enemy, but do You think my grandfather, my
teacher, they are my enemies? You killed demon Madhu, therefore Your name is Madhus■dana, but
You are asking me to kill my grandfather and teacher." That is the hint. "It is all right that Your name is
Madhus■dana. You killed one demon whose name was Madhu, but You are asking me,
Bh■■mas■dana? Bh■■ma is my grandfather. And Dro■as■dana?" S■dana means killer. "So how
can I be that?" That is the answer.
Tam■la K■■■a: "It is better to live in this world by begging than to live at the cost of the lives of great
souls who are my teachers. Even though they are avaricious, they are nonetheless superiors. If they
are killed, then our spoils will be tainted with blood." (BG 2.5)
Prabhup■da: This is another indication how superiors should be shown respect. Arjuna says: "Although
they have become avaricious, still, they are my superior." Avaricious, why? "They have got full affection
for me. My grandfather Bh■■ma has got full affection for me. And Dro■■c■rya, I am his very dear
student, so he has also my very affection . . . good affection for me.
But because Duryodhana has paid them, he has accepted their service. Paid them. So avaricious.
Simply for money, in spite of so much affection and intimate relationship, they have accepted the
service of Duryodhana, counting on money. So therefore they are avaricious. But in spite of their being
avaricious, they are my respectful."
This is respect. This is respect, that the respectful person who is my respectful, even there are some
characteristics who does not command respect, still respect should be offered. This is respectful
offering. Yes. Sometimes it may be . . . the example is given, in the Bhagavad-g■t■ you'll find, api cet
sudar■c■ro bhajate m■m ananya-bh■k s■dhur eva sa mantavya■ (BG 9.30): "Even a devotee is
sometimes found not acting properly, but because he has got that unflinching faith and devotion upon
Me," K■■■a says: "therefore he is saint." Only for that one qualification—he does not know except
K■■■a.
So to such person, even some flaws are found in their character . . . just like we have imposed some
rules that illicit sex relationship and intoxication, meat-eating, so many things. So . . . of course,
intentionally one should not break these laws. But even sometimes we may find that there is some flaw
in one's part . . . suppose if I see somebody smoking, but he is doing K■■■a consciousness very
nicely. So we should not deride.
We shall give him concession to reform. It does not mean that because he has accidentally smoked,
smoking, that does not mean he has become immediately disqualified. As Arjuna is showing, "Although
they have become avaricious, still, they are my superiors. Still. Still, they are my superiors."
This is. This is called unflinching faith. In spite of seeing my respectful superior abominable, not
willingly, but by accident, still, I should not withdraw my respect. That is the . . . hmm.
Tam■la K■■■a: "Nor do we know which is better, conquering them or being conquered by them. The
sons of Dh■tar■■■ra, whom if we killed we should not care to live, are now standing before us on this
battlefield." (BG 2.6)
Purport: "Arjuna became perplexed in this connection, not knowing whether he should execute the
fighting with the risk of committing unnecessarily violence, although it is the duty of the k■atriyas, or
whether he should not and prefer instead to live by begging. Because if he did not conquer the enemy,
begging would be the only means left for his living. There was no certainty of victory, because either
side might emerge victorious."
Prabhup■da: These are his causes of perplexities, how he was thinking, that has been tried to be
explained.
Yes, go on.
Tam■la K■■■a: "Even if there were victory awaiting them, because their cause was justified, still, if
the sons of Dh■tar■■■ra should die in battle, it would be very difficult to live in their absence. Under
the circumstances that would be another kind of defeat. All these considerations by Arjuna definitely
proved that he was not only a great devotee of the Lord but that he was also highly enlightened and
had complete control over his mind and senses."
"His desire to live by begging although he was born in the royal household is another sign of
detachment. He was fully in the quality of forbearance as all these qualities combined with his faith in
the words of instruction of ■r■ K■■■a, his spiritual master, give evidence."
"It is concluded that Arjuna was quite fit for liberation. Unless the senses are controlled, there is no
chance of elevation to the platform of knowledge, and without knowledge and devotion there is no
chance of liberation. Arjuna was competent in all these attributes over and above his enormous
attributes in his material relationships."
Prabhup■da: Go on.
Tam■la K■■■a: "Now I am confused about . . ."
Prabhup■da: Yes. What is there?
Tam■la K■■■a: "Now I am confused about duty and have lost all composure because of weakness. In
this condition I am asking You to tell me clearly what is best for me. Now I am Your disciple and a soul
surrendered unto You. Please instruct me." (BG 2.7)
Purport: "By nature's own way, the complete system of material activities is a source of perplexity for
everyone. In every step there is perplexity, and it behooves one therefore to approach a bona fide
spiritual master who can give one the proper guidance for executing the purpose of life. All Vedic
literatures advise us to approach a bona fide spiritual master to get free from the perplexities of life,
which happen without our desire.
They appear like a forest fire which takes place without being set by anyone. Similarly, the world
situation is such that perplexities of life automatically appear without our wanting such confusion.
Nobody wants fire, and yet it takes place and we are perplexed.
"The Vedic wisdom therefore advises that in order to solve the perplexities of life and to understand the
science of the solution one must approach a spiritual master who is in disciplic succession. A person
with a bona fide spiritual master is supposed to know everything. One should not therefore remain in
material . . ."
Prabhup■da: This is a translation of a Vedic version, ■c■ryav■n puru■o veda (Ch■ndogya Upani■ad
6.14.2).
■c■ryav■n, one who has ■c■rya as his guidance, he is supposed to know everything. ■c■ryav■n
puru■o veda. That is been given there.
Tam■la K■■■a: "One should not, therefore, remain in material perplexities but should approach such
a teacher. This is the purport of this verse. Who is the man in material perplexities? It is he who does
not understand the problems of life."
"In the Garga Upani■ad this is described as follows: He is a miserly man who does not solve the
problems of life as a human and who thus quits this world like the cats and dogs, without understanding
the science of self-realization. He is called a miserly man. This human form of life is the most valuable
asset for the living entity, who can utilize it for solving the problems of life. Therefore one who does not
utilize this opportunity is a miser."
Prabhup■da: As a miser does not properly use his asset . . . suppose you have got one million dollar,
you keep it only, you do not use it properly or you spoil it, then you are called miser. But if you utilize it
properly and gain out of it, then you are intelligent.
Similarly, Garga Upani■ad says, makes distinction, two classes. One class of men he says k■pa■a.
K■pa■a means miser. And another class of men he says br■hma■a, brahmins.
So he classifies, etad viditv■sm■t ya praiti sa br■hma■a■. This self-realization process . . . we shall
die. It is sure. Every one of us will die. But we should not die like cats and dogs. That is the difference.
We may die. We must die. Nobody can escape death. But before death we must know what is self and
self-realization. They are brahmins.
Those who are trying to understand what he is, what is his relation with God and how he should live,
they are called br■hma■as. And those who are living like cats and dogs, simply eating, sleeping,
mating and dying, so they are dying like cats and dogs.
So death is inevitable. That is also advised by Prahl■da Mah■r■ja in his instruction to his class
fellows, kaum■ra ■caret pr■jño dharm■n bh■gavat■n iha (SB 7.6.1).
"My dear friends, from this beginning of life—we are now five years old—from this life we should try to
understand bh■gavata-dharma." Bh■gavata-dharma means to understand our relationship with the
Supreme Lord. That is called bh■gavata-dharma. M■nu■am adhruvam. Tad apy adhruvam. Although
the life is temporary, but it is very suitable for self-realization. So therefore one should begin this
process from childhood.
Just like modern education system, if children are given some playthings, engineering . . . I've seen in
your country especially; he's given railway line and so many things. He can understand how railway
system is working, or engineering, so that from the very beginning of his life he's getting idea and he
may catch up some line of activities. Similarly, this K■■■a conscious education also should be given
from the very beginning of life.
That is the mistake of the modern civilization. Everyone is becoming engineering, technologist or
medical man or so many. But the real problem of life is to understand the self. But there is no
educational system throughout the whole world what is the self, what is his need, how it is constituted,
how it is working, so many things. In Boston, there was a Massachusetts Technological . . . you know
that?
Devotee: Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Prabhup■da: Yes. So I explained there that, "Here is a nice technological institute, but where is your
this technological department, to understand?" So the students very much appreciated it.
Factually, this is the defect. We know—this will be the beginning of Bhagavad-g■t■—that there is
something which minus, this body is useless. But nobody is trying to understand what is that
something. There is no technological institute to understand what is that something. Is it not defective?
And still, they are very much proud of advancement of education.
The real thing is missing. You have got all departments for comforts of this body, for maintaining this
body, but the thing which minus this body, the body is useless, what about that thing? That is
Bhagavad-g■t■. That is Bhagavad-g■t■. Bhagavad-g■t■ is teaching that technology.
You should try to understand this. Bhagavad-g■t■ is not technology for the external body.
Bhagavad-g■t■ is the technology of the deh■, which is within the body, which is moving the body,
which is keeping the body fit. This body is fit, very nice, very beautiful, very attractive. How long? So
long the spirit soul is there.
As soon as the spirit soul is off, immediately it begins to decompose. There may be a nice, beautiful
young girl, everyone is hankering after her, but as soon as the spirit soul is gone, nobody will like to
accept it. Immediately it becomes useless. (laughs) Huh? So nobody is very serious what is that thing.
That is Bhagavad-g■t■.
Yes?
■r■mat■: Is that what age is, then? As the spirit soul is leaving the body, do you become older?
Prabhup■da: No, spirit soul is not old. The body is changing; that is the process. That will be explained:
Spirit soul is evergreen. The body is changing. That is to be understood. Body is changing. That
everyone can understand. Just like in your childhood your body was different. Just like this child, a
different body. And when that child will be young girl, that will be a different body. But the spirit soul is
there in this body and that body. So this is the proof that spirit soul does not change; the body changed.
This is the proof. I am thinking of my childhood. That means I am the same "I" which I was existing in
my childhood, and I remember in my childhood I was doing this, I did that. But that childhood body is no
longer. That is gone. Therefore it is conclusion that my body has changed, but I am the same. Is it not?
This is simple truth.
So this body will change, still I shall remain. I may enter into another body, that doesn't matter, but I
shall remain. Tath■ deh■ntara-pr■ptir dh■ras tatra na muhyati (BG 2.13). As I am changing my body
even in the present circumstances, similarly, the ultimate change does not mean I am dead. I enter into
another . . . that also explained, v■s■■si j■r■■ni yath■ (BG 2.22), that I change.
Just like when I was not sanny■s■, I was dressing like any gentleman. Now I have changed my dress.
That does not mean that I have died. No. I have changed my body, that's all. I have changed my dress.
Go on.
(aside) Not now.
Tam■la K■■■a: "Who is the man in material perplexity . . ." Oh, we read that. "The k■pa■as . . ."
Prabhup■da: Yes. K■pa■as, yes, you were reading there.
Tam■la K■■■a: ". . . or miserly persons, waste their time in being overly affectionate for family,
society, country, etc., in the material conception of life. One is often attached to family life, to wife and
children and other members on the basis of 'skin disease.' The k■pa■as think that they are able to
protect their family members from death, or the k■pa■a thinks that his family or society can save him
from death. Such family attachment can be found even in the lower animals, who also take care of
children.
"Being intelligent, Arjuna could understand that his affection for family members and his wish to protect
them from death were the causes of his perplexities. Although he could understand that his duty to fight
was awaiting him, still, on account of miserly weakness, he could not discharge the duty.
"He is therefore asking Lord K■■■a, the supreme spiritual master, to make a definite solution. He
offers himself to K■■■a as a disciple. He wants to stop friendly talks. Talks between a master and
disciple are serious, and now Arjuna wants to talk very seriously before the recognized spiritual master.
K■■■a is therefore the original . . ."
Prabhup■da: Here is a technique. The same K■■■a and same Arjuna, they are talking as friends.
Then what was the necessity of Arjuna accepting K■■■a as spiritual master? The same Arjuna and
same K■■■a, they'll talk, but what is the necessity of accepting as spiritual master? That means after
accepting spiritual master he'll not argue. He'll simply accept whatever He says. That is the technique.
Friendly talks, equal level, He . . . K■■■a was talking something and he was replying. So that
argument has no end. But when he accepts Him as spiritual master, there is no more argument. One
has to accept whatever He says. Therefore he's accepting as spiritual master. After this, Arjuna will
never say, "This is wrong, this is, no," or "I don't agree." No. He'll accept.
So acceptance of spiritual master means to accept anything whatever he says. Therefore one has to
select a spiritual master whom he can completely surrender. That is the technique. Veda-v■kya. Just
like in the Vedic injunction, nobody can deny. Similarly, spiritual master is also representative of Veda.
■c■ryav■n puru■o veda (Ch■ndogya Upani■ad 6.14.2).
So similarly, it is just like Vedic injunction.
So spiritual master has also got the great duty. He has to instruct the disciple in such a way that he may
not be misled, and that is not possible, because a spiritual master is he who will simply speak from
authoritative sources. He'll speak from Bhagavad-g■t■, Bh■gavata, or what was spoken by N■rada,
Vy■sa. That is his authority. He does not say: "In my opinion it is . . ." No.
Therefore it is perfect, it is coming from the disciplic succession, and if one agrees to such instruction,
then he's also perfectly advancing. It is not difficult to understand. So he's accepting. "Now I accept You
as my spiritual master. You teach me." Is that the statement?
Yes. What is that?
Tam■la K■■■a: "He offers himself to K■■■a as a disciple. He wants to stop friendly talks. K■■■a is
therefore the original spiritual master in the science of the Bhagavad-g■t■, and Arjuna is the original
disciple in understanding the G■t■."
"How Arjuna understands the Bhagavad-g■t■ is stated in the G■t■ itself, and yet foolish mundane
scholars explain that one need not submit to K■■■a as a person but to the unborn within K■■■a.
There is no difference between K■■■a's within and without, and one who has no sense of this
understanding is the greatest fool, the greatest pretender."
"I can find no means to drive away this grief which is drying up my senses. I will not even be able to
destroy it if I win an unrivalled kingdom on the earth with sovereignty like the demigods in heaven." (BG
2.8)
"Sañjaya said: Having spoken thus, Arjuna, chastiser of enemies, told K■■■a, 'Govinda, I shall not
fight,' and fell silent." (BG 2.9)
"O descendant of Bharata, at that time K■■■a, smiling in the midst of both the armies, spoke the
following words to the grief-stricken Arjuna." (BG 2.10)
Prabhup■da: So Arjuna was so serious, and K■■■a was smiling. (laughs) "Just see the fool, what he
is doing." Therefore there was necessity of instructing Bhagavad-g■t■. The fool has to be instructed.
Yes. This is the . . . He was smiling.
This is childish. He was very serious, "Oh." Just like sometimes a child is very serious, and the father is
smiling. Yes. So now Bhagavad-g■t■ will be spoken. He has accepted K■■■a as spiritual master.
Now He'll teach. So what does He teach?
Next?
Tam■la K■■■a: "The Blessed Lord said: While speaking learned words, you are mourning for what is
not worthy of grief. Those who are wise lament neither for the living nor the dead." (BG 2.11)
Prabhup■da: This is the first version of K■■■a as teacher.
What is that? Read it again.
Tam■la K■■■a: "Those who are wise lament neither for the living nor the dead."
Prabhup■da: Yes. A■ocy■n anva■ocas tva■ prajñ■-v■d■■■ ca bh■■ase (BG 2.11) that, "You are
lamenting for a thing which no learned man does. That means you are not learned, but you are talking
just like a learned man."
What is that? "You are talking"?
Tam■la K■■■a: "While speaking learned words you are . . ."
Prabhup■da: Yes. "You are speaking learned words, but your behavior shows that you are not learned,
because you are lamenting on a subject which no learned man laments." And politely He says that
"You are not learned, but you are talking just like a learned man." That you will find. Dr. Frog, (laughs)
speaking like a very great philosopher.
Just like here, that Dr. Radhakrishnan, that says: "It is not to K■■■a but within K■■■a." That fool
does not know that there is no within or without of K■■■a. Rather, K■■■a is within and without. That
he does not know. And he's accepted as a very great, learned man, Dr. Frog, or Dr. Radhakrishnan.
You see?
This is going on in the world. They are posing themself as very learned, but . . . this can be detected by
devotees: who is learned and who is not learned. Others cannot detect. Others will be misled. The
devotees, they have got such eyes to see that they can immediately, I mean, discriminate who is a fool,
who is learned.
There is a story that one man was searching after the truth. So he met some person, saintly person. So
he gave him one feather, that "You try to see within the feather who is a human being and who is not."
So when he began to see within the feather, he saw, "There is no human being." Similarly:
Guru, or the spiritual master . . .
(break) . . . means pure devotee.
B■rabhadra: In the ■■rama, and before that when you said that a br■hma■a is . . . do you mean,
when you say br■hma■a, do you mean . . . I mean are they . . . the devotees who are not pure but . . .
Prabhup■da: Yes, they're also pure devotees because they're following my instruction. Just like a
technician, he is expert, but somebody is assisting him. So the assistants, because they are following
the instruction of the expert, therefore their work is also complete. So it is not necessarily that one has
to become pure devotee immediately.
Just like we are also following the instruction of our spiritual master. I don't claim that I am pure devotee
or perfect, but my only qualification is that I am trying to follow the instruction of the perfect. Similarly . .
. this is called disciplic succession. Just like here it is stated that K■■■a is the original spiritual master
and Arjuna is the original student.
So Arjuna said that sarvam etad ■ta■ manye yad vadasi ke■ava (BG 10.14): "My dear K■■■a,
whatever You are saying, I accept in total," in the Tenth Chapter. I don't make . . . just like Dr.
Radhakrishnan says: "It is not to K■■■a, it is something else." He does not accept in that way. He
says that, "Whatever You are saying, I accept it. You are saying that You are the Supreme, I accept it. I
don't say that You have got a separate thing within. That is Supreme—You are not Supreme, as
person." This is impersonalist. They do not know that K■■■a has no such . . .
A conditioned soul . . . just like we are, I am different from my soul. "I am" means I am my body, or I am
soul, different from the body. So K■■■a has no such differentiation. He does not know that, because
he's not following K■■■a, the perfect spiritual master. He's following some rascal spiritual master.
Therefore he has this mistake. But if we follow Arjuna and K■■■a, then we get the perfect knowledge.
May not be cent per cent perfect, but as far as possible, if we follow the instruction as it is, that much
perfect. In this way one will get perfection.
So one has to follow. The same example, try to understand, that a perfect, expert technologist or
technician or mechanic is working, and somebody is working under his instruction. So this somebody,
because he is strictly working under the instruction of the expert, he's also expert. He may not be cent
per cent expert, but his work is expert. Is that clear? Because he is working under the expert. Do you
follow?
So if you follow pure devotee, then you are also pure devotee. It may not be one is cent per cent pure,
because we are trying to raise ourself from the conditional life. But if we strictly follow the pure devotee,
then we are also pure devotee. So far we do, that is pure.
So pure devotee does not mean one has to become immediately cent per cent pure. But if he sticks to
the principle that, "We'll follow a pure devotee," then his actions are . . . he is as good as a pure
devotee. That is a . . . it is not I am explaining in my own way; it is the explanation of Bh■gavata.
Mah■jano yena gata■ sa panth■■ (CC Madhya 17.186).
We have to follow the footprints of pure devotees. It is said that tarka■ aprati■■ha■. If you want to
become pure by your arguments and logic, that is not possible. I may be defeated by another strong
man, who is stronger in argument than me. So this is not the way of becoming purified, tarka, simply
arguing.
Tarka■ aprati■■ha■ sm■tayo vibhinn■■ (CC Madhya 17.186). ■rutaya■, scriptures. Suppose
somebody sticks to the scriptures. So scriptures, there are different types of scripture. So they are
vibhinna. Vibhinna means different types. So how we can become purified by . . . even by following the
scriptures?
Muni means thoughtful, philosophers. If we follow a particular type of philosopher, that is also not
perfect, because I may be under the care of a philosopher, frog philosopher. So that is also not sure.
Tarko 'prati■■ha■ sm■tayo vibhinn■ na c■s■v ■■ir yasya mata■ na bhinnam, dharmasya tattva■
nihita■ guh■y■m. Therefore to become pure or to understand the essence of purity is very
confidential. It is not to be acquired by our own efforts, by argument or by being expert in scripture or by
becoming a philosopher or a similar way. It is very confidential. Then how? Mah■jano yena gata■ sa
panth■■ (Mah■bh■rata Vana Parva 313.117).
You have to follow a pure devotee, acknowledged devotee.
Similarly, in the Bhagavad-g■t■, if we follow Arjuna, then we understand Bhagavad-g■t■ as it is. But if
we don't follow Arjuna, if we follow somebody, Dr. Frog, or create our own interpretation, then we
remain impure. So mah■jano yena gata■ sa panth■■. We have to follow the footprints of mah■jana,
great soul. So here is directly you are meeting great soul, Arjuna. He is directly being taught
Bhagavad-g■t■ by the original teacher. Who can be greater authority than Arjuna?
So as Arjuna accepts Bhagavad-g■ta, if you accept Bhagavad-g■t■ in that way, then your study of
Bhagavad-g■t■ is perfect. It is very simple. Therefore I'm saying here that K■■■a is the original
teacher, and Arjuna is the original student. So you follow the original student, you understand
Bhagavad-g■t■, even K■■■a is not present before you. He is present by His words. This is the way of
following what is pure.
Yes?
Tam■la K■■■a: Can K■■■a give us the ability to someday remember every word that you are saying
to us now? Because I, myself, I forget so much. I want to hear just how you are talking and I can't.
Prabhup■da: What is that? (chuckles) I don't follow.
Tam■la K■■■a: I want to be able to hear you saying exactly what you're saying now. I want to always
be able to hear it, but I forget.
Prabhup■da: Why?
Tam■la K■■■a: My memory is very poor.
Prabhup■da: No. If we try . . . memory may be poor. Everything depends on cultivation. If you cultivate
something, your memory increases. Everyone becomes expert not in one day, but by cultivation.
Similarly, if you try to remember, then your memory will help you to remember. It is not difficult. That is
stated in the Bhagavad-g■t■, that we have to try to remember K■■■a. He's so beautiful, His
instructions are so nice, if we simply remember K■■■a . . .
That was the perfection approved by Lord Caitanya. I think I have narrated the story. When Lord
Caitanya was traveling in South India in a big temple, Ra■gan■tha temple, He went to see the Deity,
and He saw one brahmin was reading Bhagavad-g■t■. And people were joking him, "Oh, Mr. brahmin,
how you are reading Bhagavad-g■t■?"
Because they were the neighbors, they knew that this brahmin was illiterate and he was studying
Bhagavad-g■t■. So they were joking. But the brahmin did not care them. He was taking the book, and
in his own way he was reading.
Caitanya Mah■prabhu saw this incidence, He came to the brahmin. So He asked the brahmin, "My
dear brahmin, what you are reading?" So he could understand, "This persons is not joking with me; He
is serious." So he explained, "My dear sir, I am reading Bhagavad-g■t■.
Unfortunately, I am illiterate. I do not know even the alphabets." "Why you are reading
Bhagavad-g■t■?" So he said that, "My spiritual master knows that I am illiterate, but still, he has asked
me to read Bhagavad-g■t■. What can I do? Therefore I have taken this book. I am seeing simply. I do
not know how to read."
"Oh, that's all right. You cannot read. But I see that you are crying. How you are crying if you are not
reading?" "Yes, I am crying, of course. There is cause." "What is that?" "As soon as I take this
Bhagavad-g■t■, I remember K■■■a. K■■■a is sitting as driver, and Arjuna is hearing. I have heard
the story. I know something of the instruction but cannot read.
"So as soon as I take this book, this picture comes before me, and I simply think, 'Oh, how K■■■a is
nice that He has become a charioteer of His devotee. He is so great. Still, He has accepted a menial
service of His devotee.' This gives me so much pleasure that I cry." Caitanya Mah■prabhu embraced
him, "Your Bhagavad-g■t■ reading is perfect. You have taken the essence."
So this is the thing. If you simply remember K■■■a is teaching Arjuna and Arjuna is hearing, if you
simply remember the picture, that is sufficient. Even if you think that you cannot read. Because after all,
we have to become K■■■a conscious. We haven't got to become a learned man to argue with another
learned man.
If it is possible we can do that, but that does not make any difference if I cannot argue with others or if I
cannot teach very nicely Bhagavad-g■t■ to others. Simply if I remember this picture, that is perfection.
Because we have to become K■■■a conscious. We have to simply think of K■■■a. You think in any
way; that is your perfection. Smartavya■ satata■ vi■■u■ (Padma Pur■■a).
This is the injunction. You have to think of Vi■■u always. This is sam■dhi; this is meditation; this is
yoga siddhi, perfection of yoga. So one who has learned to think of K■■■a always, he is already on
the perfectional stage. ■r■dhito yadi haris tapas■ tata■ kim (N■rada Pañcar■tra 1.2.6).
If one has come to this stage, just to understand K■■■a the great, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and he's surrendered soul, "K■■■a, whatever You like You do. I am surrendered . . ." This
is ■r■dhana. Then he doesn't require to undergo any austerities or penance. His everything is finished.
And n■r■dhito yadi haris tapas■ tata■ kim. And if he does not come to this stage, his so-called
scholarship, learned argument, this or that—all nonsense, finished. Useless. One has to come to this
stage.
Therefore Lord Caitanya embraced the brahmin, "Yes, your study of Bhagavad-g■t■ is perfect."
Because one has to come to this stage, thinking of K■■■a always. So if one does not come to this
stage, simply by academic education he says: "It should be like this. The interpretation should be like
this," he's simply wasting time. Frog philosopher. One has to come to this stage. ■r■dhito yadi haris
tapas■ tata■ kim, n■r■dhito yadi haris tapas■ tata■ kim. So that is the perfection.
K■■■a and gop■s . . . they were cowherds girl. Their father, mother, they were only ordinary village
men, keeping cows. That's all. What was their education? They were not Ved■ntist. But they learned to
love K■■■a. That was their qualification. And Caitanya Mah■prabhu certifies, ramyad up■san■
vraja-vadhu-varge■a va kalpita (Caitanya mañjus■):
"Oh, there is no better worship than that which was contemplated by the gop■s." Because they did not
know what is K■■■a, but they loved K■■■a. That's all. They loved K■■■a that because K■■■a was
God or K■■■a was something great? No. Their natural affection was for K■■■a. They could not stay
even for a moment without seeing K■■■a. That was their qualification. This is K■■■a consciousness.
B■rabhadra: How come a lotus flower is so great?
Prabhup■da: He will explain. He will explain.
So, one has to come to perfect K■■■a consciousness some way or other. That is perfection. That is
everything. If one always thinks of K■■■a, then he is perfect. We should not forget. We have
presented so many formulas. Why? Not the formulas are important, but the formulas will help me to
remember K■■■a always.
Just like you are going to sell our magazines. So this magazine selling or taking some contribution is
not our business. Our business is that we are spreading K■■■a consciousness, people are hearing
about something about K■■■a. And because we are helping, we are also hearing. We are also
benefiting. When you speak somebody about K■■■a, then I hear also K■■■a. ■rava■a■ k■rtanam
(SB 7.5.23).
The first preliminary steps, hearing and chanting, is going on. So in this way we shall take all
opportunities so that twenty-four hours, whether awakened or sleeping, we shall always think of
K■■■a. That is perfection.
This chanting means always remembering K■■■a—Hare K■■■a, Hare K■■■a, K■■■a K■■■a,
Hare R■ma, Hare R■ma. Cooking, I am cooking for K■■■a; I am typing for K■■■a; I am going to
preach for K■■■a; I'm distributing Back to Godhead for K■■■a. In this way (laughs) always
remember K■■■a, that's all. That will make you perfect.
Yes?
Devotee: Did K■■■a have children by the gop■s?
Prabhup■da: No. K■■■a's love was not this love, sex love. That was different thing.
Yes?
Vi■■ujana: When we're engaged in spreading K■■■a consciousness by your singing or selling Back
to Godheads or speaking with people, if through our senses, like seeing or hearing or touching and
smelling, our mind gets distracted even while we're engaged in selling Back to Godhead, then how can
we always . . . how can we always return to that point of remembering even though our senses are
being dragged by billboard signs and so many . . .
Prabhup■da: No, suppose you are selling Back to Godhead. Does it not remind you K■■■a? Does it
not remind you about K■■■a? What for you are selling Back to Godhead? You could sell another
popular magazine which could sell very nicely, quickly, thousands of copies. Why you have taken this
Back to Godhead? For K■■■a. You are not for business.
You are not ordinary, I mean to say, newspaper seller. Why you have taken Back to Godhead? Your
motive is that people may know about K■■■a. That is your motive. If magazine selling is your
business, you can take any other sense gratificatory magazine. There are so many. And you can sell,
you can make some profit.
So we have to mold our life in such a way that we shall always remember K■■■a. Therefore
remembering K■■■a is my primary business. And we have to act in such a way that we may not forget
K■■■a. That should be the principle. That is the secret. Therefore it is equally good for anyone,
because we can engage anyone in the business of K■■■a.
If somebody has no, I mean to say, knowledge, he can simply sweep over the floor of K■■■a's temple.
That will make him remembering K■■■a, that, "I am cleansing the floor of K■■■a's temple." He's as
good as the editor of Back to Godhead.
Yes?
Devotee: How does the devotee go about practicing this K■■■a consciousness when he's asleep?
Prabhup■da: Yes. Just as sleep means your gross senses are stopped, but your mind works; therefore
you dream. So if you practice your mind to be engaged in K■■■a consciousness, in dream also you'll
see that you are preparing pras■dam, "I am going to sell Back to Godhead." (chuckles) That's all.
Sometimes some nights when I feel hungry, I dream that I'm eating k■■■a-pras■dam very
sumptuous. (laughing)
Devotee: Oh, haribol! (laughing)
Prabhup■da: (laughs) Somebody is supplying me nice para■■, and I am eating. (laughs) But, being
hungry, oh, my hunger is not satisfied. I'm eating, eating, till the dream is end.
So if you practice, this is the technique. We have to practice in this way, that when all functions of this
body will be stopped at the time of death, oh, we shall remember, some way or other, K■■■a. Then
successful. Immediately successful. That is the technique. Therefore Kula■ekhara is praying:
(Mukunda-m■l■-stotra 33)
The devotee, a great devotee, King Kula■ekhara. He has a nice book, Mukunda-m■l■-stotra. I began
translating, commenting, this line in V■nd■vana. So in the first verse is he's comparing his mind with
the swan. You have seen . . . I think you have seen, Jay■nanda, when we were walking in Seattle in
that park, in a lake the swan were diving near the lotus. You have seen? Yes. That is the practice. The
swan takes pleasure where there is, I mean to say, what is called, lotus or lily, lilies. There's a stem.
They dive and they entangle their long neck with the . . . that is their sporting.
So K■■■a's lotus feet, we call, lotus feet. So he says that, "My mind may be entangled with the stem
of Your lotus feet just like the swan. Immediately. I can do that now, because I am in healthy state.
Otherwise, at the time of death, kapha-v■ta-pittai■, when mucus, bile, everything will be disordered,
and my throat will be choked up, I will not be able to speak or chant. So why shall I wait for that time?
Now I am fit. Let my mind be absorbed with Your thought and let me die immediately." That is the
technique, that your mind should be always absorbed in K■■■a thought. So if by K■■■a's grace, at
the time of that last moment of quitting this body, when every function of the body will be disordered we
can remember K■■■a, then our life is successful.
So we have to practice this. This, everything, whatever we are doing, it is practicing for the last
moment. There is a Bengali proverb, bhajana kara s■dhana kara matte janle haya. How you are
advancing in K■■■a consciousness, that will be tested at the time of your death. The examination will
be at that time. So if that technique becomes perfect, then our life is perfect. At once you are
transferred to the K■■■aloka. Tyaktv■ deha■ punar janma naiti m■m eti kaunteya (BG 4.9): "My dear
Kaunteya, My dear Arjuna, that person, after quitting this body, he never comes back again to this
nonsense material world, but he comes to Me." That is perfection. People have no knowledge who is
transferred, where it is transferred, what is God, what is . . . no. Nothing of the sort. Simply eat, drink,
be merry and enjoy, and die like cats and dogs. That's all.
So we have tried to explain all these things in this Bhagavad-g■t■ As It Is. Try to read it repeatedly and
you get all information, all techniques. This life should not be misused. That should be the first point. It
should be very properly utilized in K■■■a consciousness. Consciousness is there. Just absorb it in
K■■■a. Consciousness must be absorbed in some thought. Make it K■■■a thought always.
Make your program in such a way that you cannot go out of K■■■a thought. Just like businessmen,
they're always thinking, "What profit is there? What is the bank balance? And how the business is . . .
how the profit is going?" They're always thinking of that. Somebody is thinking something. Everyone. If
one is after some woman, he's thinking of that woman always. If one is after some man, (s)he's also
thinking of that man.
So thinking must be there, some subject matter of thinking. That we have to change to K■■■a
thinking, some way or other, transferring the thinking or consciousness to K■■■a. You do it in
whatever way you like, but there are some standard way. If you follow, that will be easier. People have
some idea of God; they accept. But simply having some idea of God, one cannot think. But here is a
solid God, K■■■a, with two hands, playing flute, and one can think of Him.
Prem■ñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santa■ sadaiva h■daye■u vilokayanti ya■ ■y■masundaram
(Bs. 5.38).
They're thinking of whom? ■y■masundara. ■y■ma, blackish, but very beautiful. ■y■masundaram
acintya-gu■a-svar■pam. With transcendental qualities. Govindam adi-puru■a■ tam aha■ bhaj■mi. "I
am worshiping that Govinda." So we have to mold our life. This is K■■■a consciousness.
Chant Hare K■■■a. (devotees offer obeisances)
So you have got another good assistant?
Tam■la K■■■a: Expert.
Prabhup■da: Yes. Now take some contribution and purchase one temple. (laughs) The sa■k■rtana's
party's responsibility is increasing. Just find out some person, and give us a temple.
Tam■la K■■■a: I found someone who will give us a big garage, but it's not a temple. A nice man.
Prabhup■da: Never mind garage. Let him begin. We shall sit down there in garage. He's giving for
good or . . .
Tam■la K■■■a: No. He is volunteering. He's a businessman who has started to chant.
Prabhup■da: Oh.
Tam■la K■■■a: He's very nice.
Prabhup■da: So let him give us and we shall make our temple there in the garage. Where it is?
Tam■la K■■■a: He says it's nearby here. He said fifty people can come in.
Prabhup■da: Oh, that's all right.
Tam■la K■■■a: He said we should hold k■rtana there now.
Prabhup■da: And immediately.
Tam■la K■■■a: Yes, he's suggested it.
Prabhup■da: So do it immediately. It is K■■■a's grace. Never mind garage. We shall turn hell into
heaven. (laughter)
Svarg■pavarga, heaven, or the Brahman effulgence or hell, all these are equal to a devotee. A devotee
does not make any distinction, because he has always within his heart K■■■a. So either he goes to
hell or heaven, it doesn't matter. You see? If K■■■a goes with him, then it is no longer hell. (laughs)
Just like ■■vara■ sarva-bh■t■n■■ h■d-de■e 'rjuna ti■■hati (BG 18.61).
The Lord as Supersoul is in everyone's heart, so He's in the heart of the hog or He is in the heart of the
worm in the stool. Does it mean K■■■a is living in the stool? No. Wherever He lives, He lives in
V■nd■vana. That is His inconceivable potency. He can live everywhere, but He does not live there. He
lives in V■nd■vana. Goloka eva nivasaty akhil■tma-bh■ta■ (Bs. 5.37).
So it doesn't matter whether it is garage or anything. If somebody is voluntarily offering that,
immediately accept that. We shall sit down there, and fifty people can sit, it is sufficient. We can
decorate it nicely. Immediately. Near this place?
Tam■la K■■■a: Yes, he says it's nearby here.
Prabhup■da: Very good.
Tam■la K■■■a: He's a very nice man. He started to chant when he came to our other temple, and
every day he chants while he goes to work . . .
Prabhup■da: Very good.
Tam■la K■■■a: . . . when he's walking the street.
Prabhup■da: So he is devotee.
Tam■la K■■■a: He said he was smoking two and a half packs of cigarettes. Now he only smokes
three or four. Soon he will stop.
Prabhup■da: (laughs) You see? How practical. Yes. This is practical. One of my Godbrother, he
narrated his life history that he was distilling wine for drinking. And he said that all kinds of intoxicants
he has passed. He is graduate of all kinds of intoxication. (laughs) But when he came to Guru
Mah■r■ja, he left everything. He has not even smoking a b■■■, cigarette. P■p■ t■p■ yata chilo,
hari-n■me uddh■rilo, t■ra s■k■■ jag■i m■dh■i (Hari Hari Bifale).
The witness is Jag■i and M■dh■i. So you'll accept it.
Tam■la K■■■a: He'll have to call me. He said he would call tomorrow.
Prabhup■da: Very good.
Day■nanda: Well, did he donate it?
Tam■la K■■■a: No. We'll have a phone by tomorrow.
Day■nanda: You said he came to the other temple.
Tam■la K■■■a: Remember the Indian people came that night? I'll tell you who he is.
Day■nanda: With the twelve-year-old boy?
Tam■la K■■■a: No. He came with his wife that night.
Prabhup■da: He's Indian?
Tam■la K■■■a: No. No. There was another Indian people there that night, but he was separately with
his wife. We had a k■rtana. That was that very rich man, Indian man who came, and then there was
another couple there.
Prabhup■da: So he's also rich man?
Tam■la K■■■a: I don't think so. But he has a wife, and he says many things have been changing
since he chanted. He says he doesn't know whether he should attribute it to the chant, but he's going to
keep chanting. And he looks very . . . ah, he looks much happier.
Prabhup■da: That's all right. So, chant.
(k■rtana) (prema-dhvani) Thank you very much. (devotees offer obeisances) (end)
