Prabhup■da: I shall speak some verses from Bhagavad-g■t■, Second Chapter, in which the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, K■■■a, instructed. The beginning of instruction is the Second Chapter of
Bhagavad-g■t■. So Arjuna, representing ourself, conditioned soul, covered with the material body and
thinking in bodily conception of life . . . he was to fight with his brothers, nephews, grandfather,
Bh■■madeva, also teacher the military science, Dro■■c■rya. In this way the business was not very
palatable. Although he was forced to fight, but the opposite party who were very near, thick and thin
people, and he had to kill them, so it was not very satisfactory to him. Therefore he flatly denied to fight,
"K■■■a, I am not going to fight." He left his weapon, and then K■■■a was surprised that "My friend,
Arjuna, he is denying to fight in My presence."
So Sañjaya, the private secretary of Mah■r■ja Dh■tar■■■ra, he was relaying the message which was
going on in the battle of Kuruk■etra by higher process. Nowadays we have got experience of the
television, but the another process, antar-d■■■i, that is also television. You can see the reflection of
external activities within your heart, and you can explain. So Sañjaya, the private secretary of
Mah■r■ja Dh■tar■■■ra, he explained that Arjuna was denying to fight. So:
Madhus■dana is K■■■a's another name. So when K■■■a saw that Arjuna is unnecessarily
disturbed, then, ta■ tath■ k■pay■vi■■am a■ru-p■r■■kulek■a■am. A■ru-p■r■a, his eyes was full
with tears, "K■■■a, I have to fight with my relatives." So he was crying that, "This is not very good
business." So why he was crying? K■pay■vi■■am, being merciful upon them. They were so cruel
upon the P■■■avas that they insulted their wife, they tricked how to take away their kingdom. All this
injustice was done to them. Still, because Arjuna is a Vai■■ava, a devotee, still, he was sympathetic:
"No, no, let them do whatever they have done, but I am not going to kill them." So k■pay■vi■■am
a■ru-p■r■■kulek■a■am, vi■■dantam.
Bhagav■n uv■ca. Then, after Arjuna being silent not to fight, then Bhagav■n . . . K■■■a is
Bhagav■n. Bhagav■n means the Supreme Personality of Godhead, full with all opulences. That is
called Bhagav■n. Generally in India we speak bh■gyav■n. Bh■gyav■n means one who has got
opulences. So Bhagav■n means one who is full in opulences—in wealth, in strength, in influence, in
beauty, in education, in renunciation. In these six way when one is opulent fully, then He can be called
Bhagav■n. Partially if one is very opulent, sometimes he is also called Bhagav■n, but real Bhagav■n,
according to ■■stra, is K■■■a. K■■■as tu bhagav■n svayam. Others, they may possess some of
the opulences—not in full; partially. Just like N■rada Muni or Lord Brahm■, Lord ■iva, they are also
sometimes called Bhagav■n. But real Bhagav■n is K■■■a. K■■■as tu bhagav■n svayam. Ete
c■■■a-kal■■ pu■sa■ k■■■as tu bhagav■n svayam (SB 1.3.28). So here Bhagav■n, the Supreme
Person, K■■■a. K■■■a means, as K■■■a says in the Bhagavad-g■t■, matta■ paratara■ n■nyat
kiñcid asti dhanañjaya (BG 7.7): "There is no more superior person or element more than Me." And
when Arjuna understood K■■■a he also admitted, para■ brahma para■ dh■ma pavitra■ parama■
bhav■n (BG 10.12).
So K■■■a is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is the origin of Brahman. He is the origin of
Param■tm■. Brahmeti param■tmeti bhagav■n iti ■abdyate (SB 1.2.11). The Absolute Truth is
experienced in three ways—Brahman, Param■tm■ and Bhagav■n. So Bhagav■n is the last word of
the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Person. Therefore Vy■sadeva has purposefully written here, ■r■
bhagav■n uv■ca. Bhagav■n uv■ca means you cannot exceed the Supreme Person. Nobody can be
equal to the Supreme Person; nobody can be more than the Supreme Person. Everyone should be
under the Supreme Person. That is the meaning of Bhagav■n. So Bhagav■n said:
"My dear Arjuna, you are My friend, personal friend, and you are proposing this, which is befitting to the
an■rya." An■rya-ju■■am: "This is not for the ■ryan. You are k■atriya, you are meant for fighting for
justice, and you are denying to fight? Oh, this is not good." An■rya-ju■■am: "This kind of proposal,
cowardice, can be proposed by the an■rya." ■rya means the advanced. One who is advanced in
knowledge, in civilization, they are called ■rya, ■ryan civilization.
So in the ■ryan civilization there are four divisions to maintain the society in the correct balance. That is
also stated in the Bhagavad-g■t■: c■tur-var■ya■ may■ s■■■a■ gu■a-karma-vibh■ga■a■ (BG
4.13). The society must be divided into four classes of men. The first class means most intelligent class
of men. They should be trained up as brahmin. ■amo dama■ satya■ ■auca■ titik■■ ■rjava■,
jñ■na■ vijñ■nam ■stikya■ brahma-karma svabh■va-jam (BG 18.42). So this is the beginning of
civilization, not that all ■■dras, as it is now in this age, kalau ■■dra-sambhava■. Kali-yuga, there is no
training how to qualify a section of person to become first-class brahmin. That training is not there,
neither k■atriya, neither pure vai■ya class. We are proud of our business, vai■ya, but vai■ya means
k■■i-go-rak■ya-v■■ijya■ vai■ya-karma svabh■va-jam (BG 18.44). Vai■ya means they should take
care of the cows, cow protection, go-rak■ya. Why go-rak■ya? Why not other animal rak■ya? K■■■a
has not said animal-rak■ya or janawar-rak■ya. Go-rak■ya. The cow is very, very important animal. If
you want to advance your spiritual consciousness, then you must have sufficient milk and sufficient
grains. That is civilization. Therefore it is the duty of the vai■yas to produce food grain, ann■d bhavanti
bh■t■ni (BG 3.14). Ann■d. In the society, if you have got sufficient anna, both the animals and the
man, they will be happy. These are the instruction in the Bhagavad-g■t■, everything practical. If we
follow Bhagavad-g■t■ from all angles of vision—social, political, economical, religious, cultural—you
will be perfect. This is Bhagavad-g■t■. We are therefore taken up this mission, to preach
Bhagavad-g■t■ as it is, to solve all the problems of the world. That is ■ryan civilization. ■ryan
civilization means following the principles of Bhagavad-g■t■.
So here K■■■a is addressing Arjuna, an■rya: non-■ryan. "You are k■atriya. Your service is now
required to fight with persons who have created injustice. So what is this, that you are denying to fight?"
An■rya ju■■am. And asvargyam. Asvargyam means, "By denying your duty you cannot be elevated in
your next life, or you cannot be elevated in the higher planetary system." For a k■atriya, it is the duty of
the k■atriya to fight and lay down his life. Then he is promoted to the higher planetary system. That is
the ■■stric injunction. If he becomes victorious, then he enjoys this material world, and if he dies, he is
promoted to heaven. These things are there. Therefore K■■■a is advising Arjuna, asvargyam: "If you
deny to fight, then you will be refused to enter in the higher planetary system." Ak■rti-karam: "And you
have, you are known as a great fighter, great soldier and My friend, and this will be going against your
reputation. Don't do this." Then He says:
"My dear friend, parantapa . . ." Parantapa means one who gives trouble to the enemies. This is the
material world. A k■atriya cannot behave like a brahmin, to excuse. Brahmin business is to excuse.
K■am■-r■pa-tapasvina■. Those who are tapasv■, they can excuse, but those who are in the
governmental power, to make justice there is no question of excuse. Life for life. "You have killed one
man; you must be killed." This is justice. A brahmin, he may excuse, "All right, you have killed my man.
Never mind. I excuse you." That is a brahmin's business. But a k■atriya, the government, the ruling
power, he cannot do so. It is his mercy. It is the government's mercy when a murderer is hanged. That
is the injunction in the Manu-sa■hit■. So "Parantapa, you are k■atriya. Your business is to punish the
unjust." K■udra■ h■daya-daurbalyam: "For a k■atriya this kind of poor-heartedness, that 'I shall not
fight,' give it up. Don't indulge in such thing." Then Arjuna said, Arjuna replied:
He is addressing K■■■a as aris■dana, the killer of the enemies. He says: "But in my case, I have to
fight with Bh■■ma, Dro■■c■rya. They are my well-wisher, and how can I kill them? It is my duty to
offer my respect, touching their feet, and You are enticing me to pierce their body with arrow? So, of
course, You have killed so many enemies, but You have killed enemies. Why You are inducing me to
kill my grandfather and my teacher?" Of course, Arjuna, also intelligent. He replied that "You cannot
accuse me as an■rya. This is the consideration. Therefore I am hesitating to fight." Then he says:
"They are not only my grandfather; they are guru. And mah■nubh■v■n, very great personality,
Bh■■madeva, Dro■■c■rya. So if I kill them and if I live prosperously, taking the kingdom, do You think
it is all right that I live on the blood of my guru and great personalities? Do You think it is all right?" Of
course, he says:
"K■■■a, actually I am puzzled. It is my duty to fight, but now I am puzzled whether I shall fight or not
fight because, after all, the other side, they are my relatives, family members, dh■rtar■■■r■■.
Dh■tar■■■ra is my elder brother of my father, and his sons, they are my cousin-brothers. So I am
puzzled whether I shall fight." He plainly explained his position that, "Not that I have become an■rya. I
have got sufficient strength. I can fight, but I am puzzled whether I shall fight in this case or not." Then
he submits:
Then Arjuna decided to accept K■■■a as his guru. He . . . ■i■yas te 'ham: "I become Your disciple."
To become disciple means no more argument. When we talk friendly there is argument,
counterargument. But when there is order from guru there is no more argument. Therefore Arjuna says
that k■rpa■ya-do■opahata-svabh■va■: "Actually my behavior should be exactly like a k■atriya, to
fight for the just cause, but in this case I am denying. Therefore I am k■pa■a." K■pa■a means one
who does not properly use his position. One man is very rich, but he does not use his money, simply
sees the money, he is called k■pa■a. Similarly, Arjuna is powerful, he can fight, he is a k■atriya, but
he is denying his ability. Therefore he is thinking that "I have become k■pa■a, miser. Although I have
got strength, I am denying to fight." "Although I have got money, I do not spend." These are called
k■pa■a. So k■rpa■ya-do■opahata: "Now I am infected with k■rpa■ya-do■a."
K■rpa■ya-do■opahata-svabh■va■.
So when we become puzzled with these material affairs, what to do—to do or not to do, this is the
example—at that time we must approach a guru. That is the instruction here, we see. P■cch■mi tv■■
dharma-samm■■ha-cet■■. When we are bewildered, we do not distinguish what is religious and what
is not religious, do not use our position properly, that is k■rpa■ya-do■opahata-svabh■va■ (BG 2.7).
At that time there is need of guru. That is the Vedic instruction. Tad-vijñ■n■rtha■ sa gurum
ev■bhigacchet ■rotriya■ brahma-ni■■ham (MU 1.2.12). This is the duty. This is civilization, that we
are meeting with so many problems of life. That is natural. In this material world the material world is
problems of life. Pada■ pada■ yad vipad■m (SB 10.14.58). Material world means in every step there
is danger. That is material world. So therefore we should take guide from guru, from the teacher, from
the spiritual master how to make progress, because this . . . that will be explained later on, that the goal
of our life, at least in this human form of life, in the ■ryan civilization, the goal of life is to understand our
constitutional position, "What I am." What I am. If we do not understand "What I am," then I am equal to
the cats and dogs. The dogs, cats, they do not know. They think that they are the body. That will be
explained. So in such condition of life, when we are puzzled . . . actually we are puzzled every moment.
Therefore it is necessary one should approach to a proper guru. Now Arjuna is approaching K■■■a,
the first-class guru. First-class guru. Guru means the Supreme Lord. He is guru of everyone,
parama-guru. So anyone who represents K■■■a, he is also guru. That will be explained in the Fourth
Chapter: eva■ parampar■-pr■ptam ima■ r■jar■ayo vidu■ (BG 4.2).
So K■■■a is showing example where we should offer our surrender and accept guru. Here is K■■■a.
So you have to accept K■■■a or His representative as guru. Then your problems will be solved.
Otherwise it is not possible, because He can say what is good for you, what is bad for you. He is
asking, yac chreya■ sy■n ni■cita■ br■hi tat (BG 2.7). Ni■citam. If you want advice, instruction,
ni■citam, which is without any doubt, without any illusion, without any mistake, without any cheating,
that is called ni■citam. That you can get from K■■■a or His representative. You cannot get right
information from the imperfect person or a cheater. That is not right instruction. Nowadays it has
become a fashion, everyone is becoming guru and he is giving his own opinion, "I think," "In my
opinion." That is not guru. Guru means he should give evidences from ■■stra. Ya■ ■■stra-vidhim
uts■jya vartate k■ma-k■rata■ (BG 16.23): "Anyone who does not give evidences, proof, from the
■■stra, then" na siddhi■ sa av■pnoti, "he does not get at any time success," na sukham, "neither any
happiness in this material world," na par■■ gatim, "and what to speak of elevation in the next life."
These are the injunction.
So we must select guru. Here it is, example, Arjuna. He's accepting K■■■a as guru. Why he is
accepting? Because, he says:
So he has selected that the right person guru, and he said that, "Unless I hear from You what is right
and wrong, I cannot decide whether I shall fight or I shall not fight. Which way is better for me I cannot
understand." In this way:
"After addressing K■■■a that, 'You give me the right direction; otherwise I am not going to fight,' he left
his weapon and became silent."
Now, K■■■a took the position of guru, and He began to instruct. Tam uv■ca h■■■ke■a■.
H■■■ke■a . . . K■■■a's another name is H■■■ke■a. H■■■ke■a means h■■■ka ■■a. H■■■ka
means the senses, and ■■a, the master. Therefore K■■■a is the master of our senses, everyone's
senses. That will be explained in the Thirteenth Chapter, that k■etra-jña■ c■pi m■■ viddhi
sarva-k■etre■u bh■rata (BG 13.3). In this body there are two living entities. One is myself, the
individual soul, ■tm■; and the other is K■■■a, Param■tm■. ■■vara■ sarva-bh■t■n■■ h■d-de■e
arjuna ti■■hati (BG 18.61). So actually the proprietor is Param■tm■. I am given the chance to use it,
so my senses, so-called my senses, that is not my senses. I have not created my hand. The hand is
created by God, or by K■■■a, through the agency of this material nature, and I am given the hand to
use it for my purpose—for my eating, for my collecting. But actually it is not my hand. Otherwise, when
this hand becomes paralyzed, I am claiming, "my hand," I cannot use it, because the power of the hand
is withdrawn by the proprietor. Just like in a house, rented house, you are living. If the proprietor of the
house, landlord, eject you, you cannot live there. You cannot use it. Similarly, we can use this body as
long as the real proprietor of the body, H■■■ke■a, allows me to stay here. Therefore K■■■a's name
is H■■■ke■a. And this K■■■a consciousness movement means that we have accepted the senses
from K■■■a, it should be used for K■■■a. Instead of using it for K■■■a, we are using it for our sense
gratification. This is our miserable condition of life. Just like you are living in a place for which you have
to pay rent, but if you don't pay rent—you think that it is your property—then there is trouble. Similarly,
H■■■ke■a means the real proprietor is K■■■a. I have been given this property. That is stated in the
Bhagavad-g■t■.
Yantra: it is a machine. This machine has been given by K■■■a to me because I desired that, "If I get
a machine like a human body, then I can enjoy like this." So K■■■a fulfills your desire: "All right." And if
I think, "If I get a machine in which I can directly suck blood of other animal," "All right," K■■■a says:
"you take the machine of a tiger's body and use it." So this is going on. Therefore His name is
H■■■ke■a. And when we understand properly that "I am not the proprietor of this body. K■■■a is the
proprietor of the body. I wanted a certain type of body to use it for my sense gratification. He has given
it, and I am not happy, therefore I shall learn how to use this machine for the proprietor," this is called
bhakti. H■■■ke■a h■■■ke■a-sevana■ bhaktir ucyate (CC Madhya 19.170). When the senses . . .
because K■■■a is the proprietor of the senses—He is the proprietor of this body—so when this body
will be utilized for K■■■a's service, that is our perfection of life. H■■■ke■a h■■■ke■a-sevana■
bhaktir ucyate.
If you want the definition of bhakti, the bhakti means to use the things for the proprietor. That is right
use. If somebody use for another purpose, that is misuse. So bhakti means, when things are used
properly, that is called bhakti. Now we are thinking that this machine, this body, "I am born in India, so it
is Indian machine. It should be utilized for India's profit." Another person is thinking, "This machine, it is
gotten from America, so it should be used for America." That is going on in the name of nationality or
Communism, or society or friendship and this and so on. We have invented so many "isms," but they
are all misuse, because actually the machine does not belong to the American or the Indian or the
African. The machine belongs to K■■■a. So this is misuse.
So when we understand that we are misusing this machine improperly, that is called pure machine.
That is called pure understanding, or K■■■a consciousness. Sarvop■dhi-vinirmuktam. "I am not
American. I am not Indian. I am not brahmin. I am not k■atriya. I am not human being." Aha■
brahm■smi: "I am Brahman." Not the Supreme Brahman, but part and parcel of Brahman. Supreme
Brahman is K■■■a, Para-brahman. He is addressed as Para-brahman. So we are part and parcel of
Brahman. Therefore we are Brahman. So we have to realize this position. Aha■ brahm■smi: "I am
Brahman." I am not this machine. I am put into this machine, but because the machine is gotten either
from America or from India or from heaven or from hell, I am designating this machine as American
machine or Indian machine. Actually this machine belongs to K■■■a, and it should be used for
K■■■a. Therefore the definition of bhakti means h■■■ke■a h■■■ke■a-sevana■ bhaktir ucyate (CC
Madhya 19.170). This is bhakti.
So K■■■a, now He has taken the position of teacher. Now no more friendly talking, because Arjuna
has accepted Him as the teacher. So He's the teacher. It is the duty of the teacher to punish or to
chastise the disciple when he is wrongly going on. That is the duty. So first teaching of K■■■a,
because Arjuna has accepted His leadership, His teachership, His instruction, accepted that he will
follow His instruction, so first instruction is a■ocy■n anva■ocas tva■ prajñ■-v■d■■■ ca bh■■ase
(BG 2.11): "You rascal. You are rascal. You are talking like a very learned man, that 'How shall I kill my
this grandfather? How shall I kill my brother, this and so on?' This is all bodily concept of life. You are
talking on the bodily platform." So what is this body? It is to be neglected? "Yes." A■ocy■n anva■ocas
tvam: "It is not to be lamented."
Pa■■ita means one who knows that, "I am not this body." That is pa■■ita. The body is a lump of
matter, so what is the value of lump of matter? Either while it is moving or while it is not moving, it is a
lump of matter. Suppose we are now moving with this body with nice coat, pant, hat. That's all right. But
what it is? It is a lump of matter. Either coat, pant, or these bones and the skin and the blood and the
stool and urine, whatever this body is composed of, it is all material. And when the living entity goes
away from this body, the same lump of matter. Does it change?
So we are not lamenting at the present moment, because it is moving. And as soon as the movement is
stopped, I say: "Oh, my father has gone," "My son has gone," and we lament. So actually the body is
the same. The same body is lying here as dead body, whom we are lamenting, "my father," but you
have never seen your father. You have seen only the coats and pants and the body. That is your
education. Therefore K■■■a says, "Arjuna, you are thinking on terms of this coats and pants and
bones and muscles and urine and stool. Therefore you are rascal number one." This is the first
instruction, a■ocy■n anva■ocas tva■ prajñ■ . . . (BG 2.11). "Do any gentlemen lament for this torn-up
cloth, bones and skins and urine and stool? Does any sane man lament?" This is the first instruction.
So a■ocy■n anva■ocas tva■ prajñ■-v■d■■■ ca bh■■ase: "You are talking just like a very learned
man to argue with Me, but you are fool number one because"—agat■s■■■ . . . gat■s■n agat■s■■■
ca n■nu■ocanti pa■■it■■—"this is not the business of the pa■■ita."
So this is not the position of Arjuna only. The whole material civilization, the whole population of the
whole world, they are like this a■ocy■n anva■ocas tvam (BG 2.11). When the body is living, when the
body is moving, they are busy how to make the body comfort. And when the body is not moving they
are lamenting. That is the business. Therefore brahma-bh■ta■ prasann■tm■ na ■ocati na k■■k■ati
(BG 18.54). The . . . our business is, the material civilization means, ■ocati k■■k■ati, two business.
K■■k■ati means desiring. While the body is moving, we are desiring, making plan, "I want this. I want
this. My son requires this. My nation requires this. My community requires this." This is, means,
k■■k■ati, desiring to possess, this point. And when the body is lost, then ■ocati: "Oh, my father is
lost," "My brother is lost," "My son is lost." Two business. So long there is no spiritual knowledge, we
have got on the material conception of body two business—■ocati, k■■k■ati: desiring for things which
we do not possess and lamenting for things which we have lost. This is our two business. But if you
become self-realized, if you become aware actually what you are, then na ■ocati na k■■k■ati.
This is the business.
So our this K■■■a consciousness movement is trying to educate people to give up this bodily concept
of life. This is the sum and substance of this movement. And unless we come to understanding that, "I
am not this body, I am a spirit soul. My aim of life is missing," then we remain cats and dogs.
Anyone who is leading his life on the bodily concept of life, he is no better than the dogs and hogs. So
in order to stop this civilization of dogs and hogs, the K■■■a consciousness movement is essential.
K■■■a consciousness means to take instruction from K■■■a. This is the first instruction. A■ocy■n
anva■ocas tva■ prajñ■-v■d■■■ ca bh■■ase (BG 2.11). So gradually He will give instruction.
So it is our request that you try to study Bhagavad-g■t■ as it is. Don't try to distort it by your so-called
education. Try to understand K■■■a as He is saying. Then you will be benefited. Your life will be
successful. Thank you very much. Hare K■■■a. (applause) (break)
Indian guest: . . . (indistinct)
Pu■■a-k■■■a: What is the meaning of sac-cid-■nanda?
Prabhup■da: That is spirit soul. Sat means eternal, and cit means knowledge and ■nanda means
bliss. So if we study ourself, this body . . . this body is not eternal. Sat means eternal. So if you study
this body . . . in the Bhagavad-g■t■ you will find, antavanta ime deh■ nityasyokt■■ ■ar■ri■a■ (BG
2.18). This body is antavat; it will perish. Therefore it is not sat. Sat means eternal, and the body is not
eternal. Therefore it is very difficult to understand what is sat, because we have no education, no
experience. Everything is annihilated, destroyed, anything material. So actually we have no experience
what is sat. So . . . but Vedic instruction is, sad gama asato m■: "Don't remain in asat, noneternal.
Come to the platform of eternity." Sad gama asato m■. So that is our mission of life. The human form of
life is distinct from the cats and dogs, because if you instruct to the cats and dogs what is sat and what
is asat, it is impossible for them to understand. It is not possible. Therefore Vedic instruction is asato
m■: "Don't remain cats and dogs in the human form only. You come to the platform of eternity." Asato
m■ sad gama. So we must try what is eternal.
So far in the present condition, as this material condition, we do not know what is actually eternal,
because our body is not eternal. Therefore the first instruction is that, "You are lamenting on the body,
which is not eternal, but you are eternal. Your business is to understand the eternal." That is called sat.
And cit, cit means knowledge. Knowledge . . . at the present moment we are all in ignorance. We do not
know what is the next step, whether I am going to live or to die. Everything in ignorance. Therefore this
body is also not cit. It is full of ignorance. Then sat, cit and ■nanda, that we have got experience . . .
where is ■nanda? ■nanda means blissfulness, joyfulness. There cannot be any joyfulness in this body.
There are three kinds of miserable condition of material life, adhy■tmika, adhibhautika, adhidaivika. So
either these three or one or two is always there. Adhy■tmika means miserable condition on account of
the body and mind. So wherever we go, the body is there. So even if I am very opulent materially with
wealth . . . we are getting experience that even the most rich, richest man in the society, he is
committing suicide. Why? He has got every resources to enjoy. Why he is committing suicide? That
means there is also no ■nanda, even you possess the material things.
So there is no question of sac-cid-■nanda in this material condition of life. If you understand what is
spiritual life and if you practice how to come to the spiritual life, spiritual platform, as K■■■a is, then we
can become equal with K■■■a, sac-cid-■nanda (Bs. 5.1). Otherwise we are in ignorance. This body is
not sac-cid-■nanda. (end)
