Pradyumna: (leads chanting of verse) (Prabhup■da and devotees repeat)
(break)
(break) (leads chanting of synonyms to (BG 1.12)
tasya—his; sañjanayan—increasing; har■am—cheerfulness; kuru-v■ddha■—the grandsire of the
Kuru dynasty (Bh■■ma); pit■maha■—the grandfather; si■ha-n■dam—roaring sound, like a lion;
vinadya—vibrating; uccai■—very loudly; ■a■kham—conchshell; dadhmau—blew; prat■pav■n—the
valiant.
Translation: "Then Bh■■ma, the great valiant grandsire of the Kuru dynasty, the grandfather of the
fighters, blew his conchshell very loudly like the sound of a lion, giving Duryodhana joy."
Prabhup■da: Ahh! So Duryodhana was doubting that, "My grandfather, Bh■■ma, is more
affectionately inclined to the other party. So he may not be lenient in fighting." So in order to encourage
Duryodhana, tasya sañjanayan har■am: "Don't think that I am lenient. I am strong." Immediately, to
encourage him, he blew his conchshell. Nowadays they use bugle; formerly the conchshells were used
by the kings.
And not that . . . in modern days the fighting takes place—the poor soldiers, they come to fight, and the
leaders, they remain in safety place. It is not like that. All of them came out, k■atriya. Bh■■madeva
came, Duryodhana came, Arjuna came. And face to face, they had to fight. Not that the poor soldiers
would fight and they would remain in a secure place. No. So tasya sañjanayan har■a■ kuru-v■ddha■.
Kuru-v■ddha, the oldest man in the dynasty, Kuru dynasty, pit■maha, he's the grandfather of Arjuna
and Duryodhana—the Dh■tar■■■ra's elder uncle, his father's elder brother. He was very old man,
brahmac■r■. And in that old age also, he was taking the risk of fighting.
This is k■atriya spirit. Not that only . . . Dh■tar■■■ra was escaping. Not escaping, because he was
physically incapable, blind, therefore he did not come in the battlefield. Otherwise, even Bh■■madeva,
in such old age he also came. This is k■atriya spirit. When there is fight, there is no rest. And fight
means, "Either the other party should be killed or I shall be killed." Not that without any decision the
fighting will be stopped. No. That cannot be. When there is two party, must be belligerent, one party. So
decision is that "Either you kill me or I kill you." Not that "Without killing . . . without being killed one of
us, the fighting cannot be stopped."
Just like Jar■sandha was fighting with Bh■ma. During daytime the fighting was going on, and at night
Bh■ma was a guest of Jar■sandha, as guest is honored, respected, all the parties. But during daytime
the fighting was going on. And this fighting went on for twenty-eight days. Still there was no decision.
Then K■■■a gave hint, Bh■■ma, er, Bh■m . . . Bh■m . . . Bh■masena, that "Jar■sandha has got a
defect. He is joined, two bodies joined. So if you bifurcate him, then he will be killed." So later on,
Bh■masena took that policy, and Jar■sandha was killed.
So amongst the k■atriyas when there is fighting, unless one party is killed, the fighting cannot be
stopped. This is the Battle of Kuruk■etra, to see the history of the former kings and k■atriyas, how they
were determined. This is one of the qualification of k■atriya: not to go away from the fighting. When
there is challenge of fighting, immediately a k■atriya would accept. That is k■atriya spirit,
■■vara-bh■va■ ca, and ruling over others, and charitable. These are the symptoms of k■atriya.
They are described in the Bhagavad-g■t■: br■hma■a qualification, k■atriya qualification, vai■ya
qualification, ■■dra qualification. So . . . very nice arrangement, Vedic civilization. Everyone is guided
by the superior. The br■hma■a guides the k■atriyas, the k■atriya guides the vai■yas, and the vai■ya
employs the ■■dras. C■tur-var■ya■ may■ s■■■a■ gu■a-karma-vibh■ga■a■ (BG 4.13). In this
way, four division of br■hma■a, k■atriya, vai■ya, they manage the whole society so nicely. The
k■atriyas, as the k■atriya's business was to give protection to the citizens, similarly, vai■ya's duty was
to give protection to the animals. K■■i-go-rak■ya-v■■ijya■ vai■ya-karma svabh■va-jam (BG 18.44).
Vai■ya, they should engage themselves in agricultural production and giving protection to the cows,
especially mentioned, go-rak■ya.
Go-rak■ya, cow protection, is one of the item of state affairs. But now there is no cow protection. Poor
cows, they deliver milk, and later on they become slaughtered. How much sinful the modern society is,
and they still want peace and prosperity. That is not possible. The society must be
divided—br■hma■a, k■atriya, vai■ya, ■■dra—and they must execute their proper duty. And the
vai■yas, they should give protection to the cows. And the ■■dras, they should work under the direction
of the higher three divisions. In this way there will be nice management.
Then, as it is stated, during the reign of Mah■r■ja Yudhi■■hira, k■ma■ vavar■a parjanya■ (SB
1.10.4). Then nature also will help. If you keep things all right, according to the direction, then nature
also will help you. Nature will give you sufficient foodstuff. Vavar■a parjanya■, k■mam. Whatever the
necessities of life, it will be supplied by nature simply by proper pouring of water, v■■■i. Actually, now
the whole world is suffering for drought. There is scarcity of rain.
And if the rain is stopped for one or two years more, there will be havoc. It is already there, havoc. In
India there is famine, because they are more . . . mostly agriculturist. So there is famine. In other
countries they have got industries, but India is not so industrially advanced. So without water, nothing
can be produced. Therefore during Mah■r■ja Yudhi■■hira's time, k■ma■ vavar■a parjanya■ (SB
1.10.4). Yajñ■d bhavati parjanya■ (BG 3.14). If you want sufficient water, then you must perform
yajña. These are the indications, direction of the Vedic wisdom.
So at the present moment no other yajña is possible. The only yajña, sa■k■rtana-yajña, is possible.
Yajñai■ sa■k■rtana-pr■yair yajanti hi su-medhasa■ (SB 11.5.32). So if this K■■■a consciousness
movement is taken seriously all over the world and they perform sa■k■rtana-yajña, everything will be
adjusted immediately. Everything. But these rascals will not take it. They will suffer.
Otherwise, all directions are there. People have to take the advantage of direction, perfect direction,
without any mistake, and they will be happy. So we are trying to introduce this K■■■a consciousness
movement so that people may come to their senses, take advantage of it and be happy.
Thank you very much. Hare K■■■a. (end)
