Pradyumna: (leads chanting of verse) (Prabhup■da and devotees repeat)
(break)
sañjaya■—Sañjaya; uv■ca—said; d■■■v■—after seeing; tu—but; p■■■ava-an■kam—the soldiers
of the P■■■avas; vy■■ham—arranged in military phalanx; duryodhana■—King Duryodhana;
tad■—at that time; ■c■ryam—the teacher; upasa■gamya—approaching nearby; r■j■—the king;
vacanam—words; abrav■t—spoke.
Translation: "Sañjaya said: O King, after looking over the army gathered by the sons of P■■■u, King
Duryodhana went to his teacher and began to speak the following words."
Prabhup■da: Hm. So Dh■tar■■■ra inquired from Sañjaya, kim akurvata: "After my sons and my
brother's sons assembled together for fighting, what did they do?" This was the inquiry. So to
encourage him . . . because Sañjaya could understand the feelings of his master that he wanted the
fight, no compromise, k■atriya spirit: "Let my sons and my brother's sons fight." That is k■atriya spirit.
"My sons are one hundred in number, and they are only five. So certainly my sons will come out
victorious, and then the kingdom will be assured." That was his plan.
So Sañjaya, his secretary, could understand the feeling. Of course, at last he would inform differently:
yatra yoge■vara■ hari■ (BG 18.78). At last he described, "My dear sir, you do not expect victory. It is
not possible. Because the other side is K■■■a, yatra yoge■vara■ hari■, and the fighter Arjuna, so it is
beyond your expectation of victory." But in the beginning he says, "Don't be discouraged. There was no
compromise. Immediately your son Duryodhana . . ." And he is addressing himself as r■ja, because
Dh■tar■■■ra would be encouraged when at least he thinks of his son becoming the king. Therefore
he said r■ja.
So d■■■v■ tu p■■■av■n■kam. Duryodhana did not expect that the P■■■avas would be able to
accomplish military strength so nicely, because they were bereft of all sources. Their kingdom was
taken away, their money was usurped, they were sent into the forest—so many tribulations. But the
foolish Duryodhana did not know that above all, there was K■■■a on their side. That he could not
calculate. Therefore when he saw the P■■■avas are well equipped with good number of soldiers,
p■■■av■n■kam, he was little surprised, that "How they could gather so many soldiers?" So
immediately, to consult the commander-in-chief, Dron■c■rya . . .
Dron■c■rya was everyone's teacher, ■c■rya. ■c■rya means teacher. ■c■ryam upasa■gamya (BG
1.2). The military teacher. So Duryodhana, he was military teacher of the P■■■avas also. When all of
them were children, they were given under the instruction of Dron■c■rya. Dron■c■rya was
br■hma■a, but he knew the military art. Therefore he was appointed teacher for all the boys, the
Kaurava. So . . . but ■c■rya, Dron■c■rya, joined with Duryodhana. Bh■■madeva joined with
Duryodhana. None of them joined with Arjuna. Because Arjuna or Mah■r■ja Yudhi■■hira was not king
at that time. The financial control was not in their hands, and these people, sons of Dh■tar■■■ra, they
were on the government political power. The financial control was in their hand. So they were giving
enough money for maintenance to Dron■c■rya and Bh■■madeva. So they felt obliged. Of course,
they knew everything, but externally they felt obligation: "Arjuna, I am getting money from Duryodhana.
So in this point of danger, if I do not join him, it does not look well. I am getting financial maintenance."
Of course, Arjuna did not ask him. Arjuna was satisfied with K■■■a. That's all. K■■■a also divided
Himself, because it is family quarrel. So He said, "I cannot take part with anyone, and even if I take part,
side, of any of you, I shall not fight. Directly I shall not fight. I may be on your side or that side, but I'll not
fight." Still, Arjuna was satisfied. So K■■■a, in order to satisfy Arjuna, that "I shall not fight, but I shall
become your charioteer. I shall drive your chariot." So in this way the battle was arranged, and when
Dh■tar■■■ra inquired, kim akurvata sañjaya (BG 1.1), "What did they do?" he said: "Sir, don't be
disappointed. There was no compromise. Immediately your son, after seeing the military arrangement
of the P■■■avas, he was surprised, and immediately he went to Dron■c■rya"—he is the
commander-in-chief appointed first—'What to do?' " R■j■ vacanam abrav■t (BG 1.2). Then he began
to speak, to inform Dron■c■rya. So next verse.
Pradyumna:
(break)
pa■ya—behold; et■m—this; p■■■u-putr■n■m—of the sons of P■■■u; ■c■rya—O teacher;
mahat■m—great; cam■m—military force; vy■■h■m—arranged; drupada-putre■a—by the son of
Drupada; tava—your; ■i■ye■a—disciple; dh■-mat■—very intelligent
Translation: "O my teacher, behold the great army of the sons of P■■■u, so expertly arranged by your
intelligent disciple, the son of Drupada."
Prabhup■da: So—intelligent. This Drupada . . . the son of Drupada, he was meant for killing
Dron■c■rya. Drupada Mah■r■ja was not in good terms with Dron■c■rya. So he performed a yajña to
get a son who could kill Dron■c■rya. That son is this Draupada. So Dron■c■rya knew that "Drupada
Mah■r■ja has got his son. In future he would kill me." Still, when he was offered to become his
disciple, to learn military art, he accepted, "Yes." That means the br■hma■as were so liberal. "When
he is coming as my disciple, never mind he would kill me in future. That doesn't matter. But I must give
him teaching." Therefore this word is used, dh■mat■, "very intelligent." "He has learned the military
science from you just to kill you." Dh■mat■, tava ■i■ye■a. "Your disciple, he has arranged." This is
the pointing out, so that he may be angry: "This rascal has learned from me and he wants to kill me?"
But no. Duty is duty. After all, everyone will die; nobody will exist. So nobody should be afraid of death.
This is Vedic civilization. Death is inevitable. "As sure as death." Who can avoid death? So, being afraid
of death, we should not deviate from our duties, real duty. That is Vedic civilization. So Duryodhana
wanted to point out that, "This boy, your disciple, he . . . it is fixed up that he's meant for killing you, and
he has arranged nicely military phalanx just to defeat you. And he has learned this art from you."
Therefore he is using this word, dh■mat■.
Dh■, dh■ means intelligence. Dh■mat-■abda. Dh■mat. Dh■ means intelligence, and mat means
"one who possesses." Asty arthe matup-pratyaya. When one possesses something, in this sense, this
pratyaya . . . in Sanskrit there are pratyayas. So matup pratyaya. So matup. From matup, it comes to
mat. Sanskrit language means it is so reformed that each and every word has significance. Not that like
your English language, "B-U-TP-U-T but, P-U-T put." No, not like that. If you say "B-U-T but," you must
say, "P-U-T pat." But no, you change—B-U-T but, P-U-T put. Why? This kind of change cannot be
allowed in Sanskrit language. If the "u" means "ah," just like "B-U-T but," then it must always mean like
that, no change.
So dh■mat■. Dh■ means intelligence. Dh■ means intelligence. So one who has got intelligence.
Every word is used with full meaning. Sanskrit language is so nice. Therefore it is called Sanskrit.
Sanskrit, sa■sk■ta. Sa■sk■ta means reform. And the alphabets are called devan■gar■.
Devan■gar■ means these alphabets . . . just like in Europe the roman letters are used, similarly, in the
upper planetary system these alphabets are used, devan■gar■, used in the cities of the demigods.
And the language is called Sanskrit, "most reformed." And Sanskrit is the mother of all languages.
Even in this planet, the Latin is also derived from Sanskrit. Just like the "maternal," the mat■-■abda;
"paternal," pit■-■abda. So dh■mat■. So here the writer is Vy■sadeva. So every word is selected,
either in Bhagavad-g■t■ or in ■r■mad-Bh■gavatam or the Pur■■as, all writings of . . . Mah■bh■rata,
each and every word is used just like weighing in the balance. There should be . . . so many words
should be in the beginning, so many words should be in the end. And not whimsically. That cannot be
allowed. That is called sa■sk■ta s■hitya, literary. Just like Caitanya Mah■prabhu when he was
hearing Ke■ava K■■m■r■, as soon as there was little discrepancy, bhav■n■-bhart■, immediately He
criticized and defeated him. Sanskrit language is so nice.
Pa■yait■■ p■■■u-putr■■■m ■c■rya: "My dear teacher, just see how many military soldiers are
standing there on behalf of the P■■■avas, and they have been arranged by your disciple, who is
meant for killing you. So just remember." That means, "You become more strong, that this boy and the
other party may not kill you." But Duryodhana does not know that the death does not depend on military
strength or bodily strength. When death will come, nobody can check. Death is God. When K■■■a
desires that, "This man should be killed now," or "He must die now," nobody can check. R■khe k■■■a
mare ke mare k■■■a r■khe ke. If K■■■a desires to kill somebody, nobody can give him
protection—no power. And if He wants to save somebody, nobody can kill him. This is K■■■a's
protection.
Therefore this big, big commander-in-chief Dron■c■rya and Bh■■madeva, Kar■a, they were very,
very big, powerful commanders. Arjuna was nothing before them. Arjuna was just like . . . Par■k■it
Mah■r■ja compared that, "My grandfather was just like an ordinary fish, and these soldiers, these
commanders, just like timi■gala." Timi■gala, there is a fish—we get information from Vedic
literature—very big fish. They swallow up the whales. Timi. Timi means whale fish. And timi■gala
means . . . just like small fish are swallowed up like this. So just imagine how big such fish is. So these
commanders, Kar■a, Dron■c■rya and Bh■■ma, were compared with the timi■gala. And Arjuna,
although very powerful, he was compared with timi. So Par■k■it Mah■r■ja admitted that, "It was not
possible for my grandfather to win over the battle before these big, big commanders. It is only by the
grace of K■■■a he was saved."
So the conclusion is if K■■■a saves, nobody can kill; and if K■■■a wants to kill, nobody can save.
Therefore our conclusion should be that we should always be under the protection of K■■■a. Ava■ya
rak■ibe k■■■a. This is ■ara■■gati. ■ara■■gati, surrender. Surrender means that, "I am
surrendering to K■■■a with full faith that He is quite competent and able to give me protection." This is
called surrender.
Not that hesitation: "Oh, I will surrender to K■■■a, and in case of danger, He may not be able to give
me protection." That is not surrender. With full faith: "Yes, K■■■a is so powerful, K■■■a is so great,
that I am surrendering to K■■■a from this day: 'From this day . . . K■■■a, I was wandering throughout
the universe life after life, without knowing my relationship with You. Now, today, I surrender unto You.
Kindly accept me and engage me in Your service.' " This is called surrender.
Thank you very much.
Devotees: All glories to ■r■la Prabhup■da. (end)
