Pradyumna: (leads chanting of synonyms to (BG 1.6)
yudh■manyu■—Yudh■manyu; ca—and; vikr■nta■—mighty; uttamauj■■—Uttamauj■; ca—and;
v■ryav■n—very powerful; saubhadra■—the son of Subhadr■; draupadey■■—the sons of Draupad■;
ca—and; sarve—all; eva—certainly; mah■-rath■■—great chariot fighters.
Translation: "There are the mighty Yudh■manyu, the very powerful Uttamauj■, the son of Subhadr■
and the sons of Draupad■. All these warriors are great chariot fighters."
(leads chanting of synonyms to (BG 1.7)
asm■kam—our; tu—but; vi■i■■■■—especially powerful; ye—those; t■n—them; nibodha—just take
note, be informed; dvijottama—the best of the br■hma■as; n■yak■■—captains; mama—my;
sainyasya—of the soldiers; sa■jñ■-artham—for information; t■n—them; brav■mi—I am speaking;
te—your.
Translation: "O best of the br■hma■as, for your information, let me tell you about the captains who are
especially qualified to lead my military force."
Prabhup■da: So formerly, five thousand years ago, the same system, military—ordinary soldiers, then
the captain, then the commander, the commander-in-chief—as there are gradation in the modern age,
the same thing was there. But mah■-ratha, they had good qualification. Mah■-ratha means alone he
could fight with many other charioteers. They are called ati-ratha, mah■-ratha. There are different
grades of fighters.
So, so far P■■■avas are concerned, their son . . . Saubhadra . . . Saubhadra means Abhimanyu,
Subhadr■'s son. Because he was Subhadr■'s son, his name was Saubhadra. Draupad■'s son, they
are called Draupadeya. In Sanskrit, just like bhagin■, sister, bhagin■, her son is called bh■gineya,
nephews. So there is link. As soon as we speak Saubhadra, that means Subhadr■'s son. Subhadr■'s
son, he was only sixteen years old at that time. He was married with Uttar■, the daughter of Mah■r■ja
Vir■■a. So they were all mah■-rathas, ordinary . . . not ordinary fighters. This Abhimanyu was killed by
conspiracy by seven commander-in-chief. Bh■■ma, Kar■a, Dro■■c■rya, A■vatth■m■, they all
surrounded him, and they did not allow him to come out. They were very experienced commanders.
So this is k■atriya spirit. He was simply a boy, sixteen years old, and he had to be killed by the
combined efforts of very, very big commander-in-chiefs. He was so great fighter, Abhimanyu.
Abhimanyu-b■ha. So Saubhadra, Draupad■ . . . similarly, Draupad■'s sons also there. Sarva eva
mah■-rath■■ (BG 1.6). Mah■-ratha means one who could fight with one thousand chariots on the
other side. They were called mah■-rath■■.
Then Duryodhana, first of all he pointed out the military strength of the opposite side. This is
intelligence. One should take calculation of the opposing elements, or the enemy's side. In fighting the
first thing is to take estimation of the enemy's side, how much they are strong, how they have
arraigned. Then one should calculate how to counteract, how to fight with them. This is intelligence.
Without taking any calculation of the other side, if you are not prepared, then how you can become
victorious?
This is sane proposal, that is, upayan cintayet prajño apayan ca cintayet. A prajña, a intelligent man,
not only think of the bright side on this business, or this fight, or this any . . . so many things we have to
deal with. Simply we should not calculate the brighter side. There is darker side also. We should always
think, "If there is some thief, if there is some rogue, they cheat us, then what precaution I am going to
take?" This is intelligence. If I simply calculate that "In this business I will make so much profit," in the
meantime, somebody comes and cheats me and go away, then . . . therefore upayan cintayet prajña
apayan ca cintayet. Darker side also should be thought of. That is intelligence. Just like they are doing.
After calculating the darker side—enemy means darker side: "They can defeat me at any moment," that
is darker side.
So after calculating their strength, then Duryodhana is speaking about his own strength, asm■ka■ tu
vi■i■■■ ye. Vi■i■■■; not to speak of the ordinary soldiers. They're vi■i■■■. Vi■i■■■ means who
are specifically to be mentioned, high officers. Asm■ka■ tu vi■i■■■ ye t■n nibodha dvijottama. He
was in commander-in-chief. For eighteen days there was fight, and one after another, a commander
chief was killed. And sixty-four crores of men were killed in the Battlefield of Kuruk■etra. And the battle
was finished within eighteen days, not lingering for some years. No. Fight to the best capacity and finish
the business.
So everyone, both the sides, P■■■ava's side and Kaurava's side, all were killed. This Saubhadra,
Draupadeya, everyone was killed. And the other side also. Only the five brothers they remained, and
the one grandchild who was in the womb of the mother, he remained. Otherwise, everyone was
finished within eighteen days. Such a great fight it was. And people from all parts of the world, they
joined the Battle of Kuruk■etra.
Somebody was criticizing me that, "Sw■m■j■, you are introducing this Hare K■■■a movement,
people are becoming coward. They simply chant Hare K■■■a." So I replied that, "You will see the
power of Hare K■■■a movement in due course of time." He required . . . because there were two
battles in India: the battle between R■va■a and R■ma, R■ma-R■va■a, the battle of R■m■ya■a; and
another battle was Battle of Kuruk■etra. And in these two battles the hero was Vai■■ava and Vi■■u.
In the R■ma-R■va■a battle Lord R■macandra was there and His devotee Hanum■n, Vajr■■gaj■.
Similarly, in the Battlefield of Kuruk■etra, K■■■a was there, and His devotee Arjuna was there.
So Vai■■avas, they do not simply chant Hare K■■■a. If there is need, they can fight under the
guidance of Vi■■u and become victorious. A Vai■■ava's one qualification is . . . out of twenty-six
qualifications, one qualification is dak■a, expert. If there is need of fighting, they can fight like very
expert. That is also needed. K■■■a's . . . K■■■a consciousness does not mean one-sided.
K■■■a as all-pervading, the K■■■a consciousness movement also should be all-pervading. It should
touch everything, even politics, sociology, everything, if required. That is the aim. Because K■■■a's
mission is, yad■ yad■ hi dharmasya gl■nir bhavati bh■rata (BG 4.7), paritr■■■ya s■dh■n■■
vin■■■ya ca du■k■t■m (BG 4.8). There is two mission: not only to give protection to the devotees,
but also to kill the demons. To kill the demons, that is one side.
So the devotees of K■■■a should be trained up both ways: not only to give protection to the devotees,
to give them encouragement, but if need be, they should be prepared to kill the demons. That is
Vai■■avism. It is not cowardism. It is not cowardism. When need be. Generally, a Vai■■ava is
non-violent. Just like Arjuna. In the beginning he was non-violent, Vai■■ava. He said: "K■■■a, what is
the use of this fighting? Let them enjoy." So by nature he was non-violent, but he was induced by
K■■■a to become violent that, "Your non-violence will not help. You become violent. You kill them. I
want." So if K■■■a wants, we shall be prepared to become violent also. And K■■■a, that is open
secret, that paritr■■■ya s■dh■n■■ vin■■■ya ca du■k■t■m (BG 4.8). Two business of K■■■a, two
side.
So those who are devotees of K■■■a, they should be trained up both ways, they should be prepared.
But generally, there is no question of becoming violent unnecessarily. As the modern politicians,
unnecessarily they declare war, a Vai■■ava does not do so. No. Unnecessarily, there is no need of
war. When it was completely impossible to settle up the things between the P■■■avas and the
Kauravas, then K■■■a said, "All right, then there must be fight." When Duryodhana declined to spare
even a portion of land holding the s■cyagra, the point of a needle . . . he refused that, "I cannot spare
even so much land which can hold the point of a needle." Then the war was declared. There is no
question of settlement.
Otherwise, K■■■a requested that, "These five P■■■avas, they are k■atriyas. They cannot become
merchant or br■hma■a." Br■hma■a's profession is pa■hana p■■hana yajana y■jana d■na
pratigraha■. Br■hma■a can take charity from others. A sanny■s■ can take charity from others. Not a
k■atriya or a g■hastha. No. That is not allowed. "So they are k■atriyas; they cannot take the
profession of a br■hma■a, neither they can take the profession of a mercantile man, business man.
They must have some land so that rule over, take taxation. And that is their living means. So spare only
five villages to these five brothers and settle up." But Duryodhana replied, "No, Sir. What to speak of
five villages, we cannot spare even so much land which can hold the point of needle." Then the war
was declared. So Vai■■ava, they are non-violent. But if need be, they can become violent for
K■■■a's sake. This is the Battle of Kuruk■etra.
So any more? Or end here? All right, end here. Chant Hare K■■■a. (end)
