(k■rtana)
Prabhup■da: (leads prema-dhvani)
Devotees: All glories to ■r■ Guru and Gauranga. All glories to ■r■la Prabhup■da. (devotees offer
obeisances)
Prabhup■da: A■ocy■n anva■ocas tva■ prajñ■-v■d■■■ ca bh■■ase.
Pradyumna:
Prabhup■da: Once again. (Pradyumna chants verse again) Translation.
Pradyumna: Translation: "The Blessed Lord said: While speaking learned words, you are mourning for
what is not worthy of grief. Those who are wise lament neither for the living nor the dead."
Prabhup■da: "The Blessed Lord said: While speaking learned words, you are mourning for what is not
worthy of grief. Those who are wise lament neither for the living or the dead."
The K■■■a philosophy, K■■■a consciousness movement, is to teach people to understand what is
the constitutional position of the living entity. Here it is said that one who is learned, he does not lament
either for the living or for the dead body.
(aside) They should be removed from the front page. They should be removed; they should go
backwards. (pause)
The present civilization is based on the bodily concept of life: "I am this body." "I am Indian," "I am
American," "I am Hindu," "I am Muslim," "I am black," "I am white," and so on. The whole civilization is
going on on this bodily concept of life. Although there is advancement of learning, many universities
and educational institution, but nowhere this subject matter is discussed or taught, "What I am." Rather,
they're still more misled by giving them education that "You are born in this land. You must feel for your
nation, you must act for your nation," or the so-called nationality is taught. But nobody is taught actually
what he is.
The same position was for Arjuna, Arjuna in the Battlefield of Kuruk■etra. There was a fight. That is the
history of greater India, Mah■bh■rata. It is called Mah■bh■rata. This Bhagavad-g■t■ is part of
Mah■bh■rata. Mah■bh■rata means greater India or greater planet. So in that history of greater India
there is a . . . there was a fight between two cousin-brothers, the P■■■avas and the Kurus. The
P■■■avas and Kurus, they belonged to the same family, known as Kuru dynasty, and at that time, five
thousand years ago, the Kuru dynasty was ruling all over the world.
Now, what we know as Bh■rata-var■a is a fraction only. Formerly, this planet was known as
Bh■rata-var■a. Before that, from thousands of years ago, this planet was known as Il■v■ta-var■a.
But there was a great emperor whose name was Bharata. After his name, this planet was known as
Bh■rata-var■a. But gradually, in due course of time, people became disintegrated from one unit. Just
like we have got experience in India, say, twenty years or twenty-five years ago, there was no Pakistan.
But some way or other, there is another division, of Pakistan.
So actually, long, long years ago there was no division of this planet. The planet is one, and the king
was also one, and the culture was also one. The culture was Vedic culture, and the king was one. As I
told you that the Kuru dynasty kings, they ruled over the world. It was monarchy. So there was a fight
between two cousin-brothers of the same family, and that is the theme of this Bhagavad-g■t■.
Bhagavad-g■t■ was spoken in the battlefield. In the battlefield, we have got very little time. This
Bhagavad-g■t■ was spoken when the two parties met on the battlefield. And Arjuna, after seeing the
other party, that the other party, all of them belonged to his family, all family members, because it was
fight between cousin-brothers, so he became compassionate. Compassionately, he said to K■■■a,
"My dear K■■■a, I don't wish to fight. Let my cousin-brothers enjoy the kingdom. I cannot kill them in
this fight." This is the subject matter of Bhagavad-g■t■.
But K■■■a induced him that, "You are a K■atriya. It is your duty to fight. Why you are deviating from
your duty?" According to Vedic system, there are four classes of men in the society. C■tur-var■ya■
may■ s■■■a■ gu■a-karma-vibh■ga■a■ (BG 4.13). Human society must be divided into four classes
of men. Just like in our body, there are four different departments—the brain department, the hand
department, the belly department and the leg department. You require all these. If the body is to be
maintained, then you must maintain properly your head, your arms, your belly and leg. The
cooperation.
You have heard many times the caste system of India: Br■hmin, K■atriya, Vai■ya, ■■dra. This is not
artificial. It is natural. In any society you go, not only in India, in any other country, these four classes of
men are there: intelligent class of men, administrator class of men, productive class of men and laborer
class of men. You call it by different name, but there must be such division. As I told you, there are
division in my own body—the brain department, the arms department, the belly department and the leg
department. So all the kings, they belong to the arms department for protection of the people.
So formerly, the K■atriyas . . . K■atriya means one who gives protection to the citizens from being
harmed by other enemies. That is called K■atriya. So our point is that K■■■a informs Arjuna that,
"Why you are deviating from your duty? Do you think that your brother or your uncle or your grandfather
on the other side, they will be dead after fighting? No. That is not the fact." The point is that K■■■a
wanted to teach Arjuna that this body is different from the person. Just like every one of us, we are
different from the shirt and coat. Similarly, we living entities, soul, is different from the gross body and
the subtle body. This is the philosophy of Bhagavad-g■t■. People do not understand it. Generally,
people understand that he is this body. That is condemned in the ■■stras.
Go means cows, and khara means ass. Anyone who is living on the bodily concept of life,
yasy■tma-buddhi■ ku■ape tri-dh■tuke . . . the bodily concept of life is meant for the animals. The dog
does not know that he's not this body, he's pure soul. But a man, if he's educated, he can understand
that he's not this body, he is different from this body. How he can understand that we are different from
this body? That is also a very simplified method. Here, you'll find in the Bhagavad-g■t■ it is said:
Dehina■ . . . asmin dehe, in this body, as there is soul, deh■ . . . deh■ means the possessor of this
body. I am not this body. If you ask me, "What . . ." Just like sometimes we ask the child, "What is this?"
he will say: "It is my head." Similarly, if you ask me also, anyone, "What is this?" anyone will say: "It is
my head." Nobody will say: "I head." So if you scrutinizingly analyze in all parts of the body, you'll say:
"It is my head," "my hand," "my finger," "my leg," but where is "I"? "My" is spoken when there is "I." But
we have no information of the "I." We have simply information of "my." That is called ignorance.
So the whole world is under this impression of taking the body as the self. Another example we can
give you. Just like some of your relatives. Suppose my father has died. Now I am crying, "Oh, my father
is gone. My father is gone." But if somebody says: "Why do you say your father is gone? He is lying
here. Why you are crying?" "No, no, no, that is his body. That is his body. My father is gone." Therefore
in our present calculation I am seeing your body, you are seeing my body; nobody is seeing the actual
person. After death, he comes to sense: "Oh, it is not my father; it is my father's body." You see?
So we become intelligent after death. And while we are living, we are in ignorance. This is the modern
civilization. While living . . . just like people have insurance policy to get some money. So that money is
received after death, not during life. Sometimes during life also. So my point is that so long we are
living, we are in ignorance. We do not know, "What is my father, what is my brother, what I am." But
everyone is under the impression, "This body is my father," "This body is my child," "This body is my
wife." This is called ignorance.
If you study the whole world, during living time everyone will say that, "I am Englishman," or "I am
Indian," "I am Hindu," "I am Muslim." But if you ask him, "Actually are you so?" That . . . because this
body is Hindu, Muslim or Christian, because by accident the body is produced in a society of Hindu,
Muslim, or the body is born in a particular country, therefore we say: "I am Indian," "I am European," "I
am this," "I am that." But when the body is dead, at that time we say, "No, no, the person which was
within the body, that is gone. It is a different thing."
Just try to understand how much ignorant we are. We are all in ignorance. This education is wanted
because people, by this ignorance, they're fighting with one another. One nation is fighting with
another, one religionist is fighting with another religionist. But it is all based on ignorance. I am not this
body. Therefore ■■stra says, yasy■tma-buddhi■ ku■ape tri-dh■tuke (SB 10.84.13). ■tma-buddhi■
ku■ape, this is a bag of bones and muscles, and it is manufactured by three dh■tus. Dh■tu means
element. According to ■yurvedic system: kapha, pitta, v■yu. Material things. So therefore I am a spirit
soul. I am part and parcel of God. Aha■ brahm■smi. This is the Vedic education.
Try to understand that you do not belong to this material world. You belong to the spiritual world. You
are part and parcel of God. Mamaiv■■■o j■va-bh■ta■ (BG 15.7). In the Bhagavad-g■t■ God says
that "All living entities are My part and parcels." Mana■ ■a■■h■n■ndriy■■i prak■ti-sth■ni kar■ati
(BG 15.7). He's undergoing a great struggle for life under the impression, under the bodily impression
that he is this body. But this kind of impression or understanding is animal civilization. Because the
animals are also eating, sleeping, having sex intercourse and defending in their own way. So if we also,
human being, if we are engaged with all these business, namely eating, sleeping, sex intercourse and
defending, then we are not better than the animals.
The special prerogative of the human being is to understand, "What I am? I am this body or something
else?" Actually, I am not this body. I have given you so many examples. I am spirit soul. But at the
present moment every one of us is busy on this understanding that I am this body. Nobody is working
on the understanding that he is not body, he's spirit soul. Therefore try to understand this K■■■a
consciousness movement. We are trying to educate every man without any distinction. We do not . . .
Because we do not take consideration of the body. The body may be Hindu, body may be Muslim, the
body may be European, body may be American, or the body may be different style. Just like you have
got a dress. Now, because I am in saffron dress and you are in black coat, that does not mean we shall
fight together. Why? You may have a different dress, I may have a different dress. So where is the
reason for fighting?
This understanding is wanted at the present moment. Otherwise, you'll be a civilization of animals. Just
like in the jungle, there are animals. There are cats, dogs, jackals, tigers, and they always fight.
Therefore, if we really want ■■nti—■■nti means peace—then we must try to understand "What I am."
That is our K■■■a consciousness movement. We are teaching everyone what he is actually. But his
position is . . . everyone's position, not only my or yours. Everyone. Even the animals. They're also spirit
spark. They're also. K■■■a claims that:
K■■■a claims that, "I am the seed-giving father of all living entities." Actually, this is the fact. If we want
to study the origin of creation, everything is explained in the Bhagavad-g■t■. Just like the father gives
the seed within the womb of the mother, and the seed grows a particular type of body, similarly, we
living entities, we are all part and parcel of God, so God impregnates this material nature, and we come
out in this material body under different forms. There are 8,400,000's of forms. Jalaj■ nava-lak■■■i
sth■var■ lak■a-vi■■ati (Padma Pur■■a). There is a list. Everything is there.
So our present situation is that the whole civilization is going on under the wrong impression that
everyone is the body. That is not a fact. Therefore, this K■■■a k■rtana, this Hare K■■■a movement,
it has got a special effect. It is . . . don't think this Hare K■■■a movement is ordinary sound vibration. It
is spiritual vibration. It is called mah■-mantra. Mah■-mantra. Just like . . . I do not know in your country
whether there's snake-chanters. In India still, there are many snake-chanters . . . enchanters, I am
sorry. So they chant some mantra, and a man, snake-bitten, can be revived to his consciousness.
Anyone Indian present here, they know. Still, especially I have seen in Punjab, there are many
snake-enchanters who know the . . . how to chant the mantras.
So if it is physically possible that a dead man . . . of course, when a man is bitten by a snake he's not
dead. He becomes unconscious. He's not dead. But by this chanting of mantra, he comes to his
consciousness. Therefore, it is the system in India, if a man is bitten by a snake, he's not burned, or
he's not taken as dead body. He's floated in some lifeboat and given to the water. If he gets chance he
may come out again to consciousness.
So similarly, we are, at the present moment, due to our ignorance, we are sleeping. We are sleeping.
Therefore, to awaken us, this mantra, mah■-mantra, is required to awaken. Ceto-darpa■a-m■rjanam
(CC Antya 20.12). Just like these boys, these European boys and girls who are along with me . . . I
have got about, more than three, four thousand disciples like that. They are chanting Hare K■■■a.
And not that whimsically they are chanting. They are fully convinced. If you talk with them, they will talk
very nicely on philosophy. Everything sane, as a sane man.
So how they are doing? Four years ago, they did not know what is the name of K■■■a. Perhaps they
might have seen in the English dictionary the name of K■■■a as stated "a Hindu god." But actually,
that is not the fact. K■■■a is the name of God. K■■■a means the all-attractive, all-good. All-attractive
means He must be good; otherwise, how He can be attractive? A bad, someone who is bad, he cannot
be attractive. Therefore K■■■a, this very word, means all-attractive. He has got all the good qualities,
all the opulences so that He is attractive. That is the right description of, or right nomenclature of God. If
God has got any name particular which is full in everything, that word is K■■■a. It is a Sanskrit word,
but it indicates . . . K■■■a means God. In the ■■stra it is said, ■■vara■ parama■ k■■■a■ (Bs. 5.1).
■■vara■ means controller, and parama■, the supreme. ■■vara■ parama■ k■■■a■. That is the
instruction of Vedic literature.
So our this K■■■a consciousness movement is not a sectarian religious movement. It is a scientific
philosophical movement. Try to understand it. But the process is very simple. The process is by
chanting this Hare K■■■a, Hare K■■■a, K■■■a K■■■a, Hare Hare/ Hare R■ma, Hare R■ma,
R■ma R■ma, Hare Hare chant. We are not magician, but we ask our students, "Simply you chant this
transcendental vibration," and he becomes gradually cleansed of all dirty things within the heart. This is
our process. Caitanya Mah■prabhu has explained, He has given us the instruction,
ceto-darpa■a-m■rjanam (CC Antya 20.12).
Our whole trouble in this material world is due to misunderstanding. The first misunderstanding is that,
"I am this body." And actually, every one of us, we are standing on this platform, the bodily concept of
life. And because the basic standing foundation is mistaken, therefore whatever we are creating,
whatever we are understanding, they are all mistaken, because the basic platform is mistaken. So first
of all we have to clear away this mistaken idea that I am this body." That is called
ceto-darpa■a-m■rjanam, cleansing the heart. I am thinking, "I am this body," but actually I am not this.
So we have to cleanse this misconception, and that is very easily done by simply chanting this Hare
K■■■a mah■-mantra. It is practical.
So our request is that every one of you, if you kindly take our instruction to chant Hare K■■■a
mah■-mantra . . . you are not losing anything, but the gain is very much. We are not charging you
anything. Just like others, if he gives some mantra, they will charge. But we are freely distributing.
Everyone can take. Even the children, they can take. There are many children in our society. They
chant and dance. It does not require any education. It does not require any price. Simply if you chant . .
. why do you not make an experiment and see by chanting? That is our request. Hare K■■■a, Hare
K■■■a, K■■■a K■■■a, Hare Hare/ Hare R■ma, Hare R■ma, R■ma R■ma, Hare Hare.
One may object, "Why shall I chant your Hindu K■■■a's name?" So we don't say that K■■■a, or God.
God has got many names. That we admit. It is not . . . God is unlimited. Therefore, He must have
unlimited names. But this K■■■a word is very perfect because it means all-attractive. You can discuss,
"God is great." That's all right. How He's great? That is another understanding. So if you think that
"K■■■a is the name of Hindu God. Why shall I chant this?" So Caitanya Mah■prabhu says, "No. If you
have got a name, another alternative name of God, then you chant that." Our only request is that you
chant the holy name of God. If you have got any name of God, you can chant. You'll be purified. That is
our propaganda.
Caitanya Mah■prabhu says that each and every name of God is as powerful as God. Because God is
Absolute, therefore there is no difference between His name, form, pastimes. Nothing is different from
God. That is absolute knowledge. Advaya-jñ■na. So if you chant the holy name of God, that means
you are directly in touch with God. Because the name is not different from God. Try to understand.
Similarly, if you touch fire, it will act. If you do not know or know what is the quality of fire, it doesn't
matter; if you touch fire, it will act. Similarly, if you actually chant the holy name of God, it will act.
The example is: just like you put a iron rod in the fire, it becomes warm, warmer, and gradually it
becomes red hot. By the association of fire, the iron rod becomes fire. Iron rod is not fire, but by
association with the fire, it becomes as good as fire so that when it is red hot, you touch anywhere, the
iron rod will burn. Similarly, if you keep yourself always in touch with God, then gradually you become
godly. You do not become God, but you become godly. And as soon as you become godly, then all
your godly qualifications will come out. This is the science. Try to understand.
We are part and parcel of God, every living entity. You can study God, what is God, by studying
yourself. Because I am part and . . . just like from a bag of rice, if you take a few grains of rice, you see,
you can understand what quality of rice is there in the bag. Similarly, God is great, that's all right. But if
we simply study ourself, then we can understand what is God. Just like you take a drop of water from
the ocean, you can understand what are the chemical composition of the ocean. You can understand.
So that is called meditation: to study oneself, "What I am." If one has actually studied himself, then he
can understand God also. Now take, for example, "What I am." Even you meditate upon yourself, you
can understand that you are an individual person. Individual person means you have got your own
opinion, I have got my own opinion. Therefore sometimes we disagree, because you are individual, I
am individual. And because we are all individuals, as part and parcel of God, then God also must be
individual. This is study.
As I am a person, so God is also person. God cannot be imperson. If we take God as the original
father, supreme father . . . the Christian religion believes. All other religion believes. And we also
believe, Bhagavad-g■t■. Because K■■■a says, aha■ b■ja-prada■ pit■ (BG 14.4): "I am the original
father of all living entities." So if God is father of all living entities and we all living entities, we are
individual person, how God can be imperson? God is person. This is called philosophy. This is called
logic.
Now here, in this world, we have got experience that we want to love somebody—anyone; even in
animal kingdom. A lion also loves the cubs. The love is there. Prema. It is called prema. So therefore
this loving affair is there also in God. And when we come in contact with God, our dealings will be
simply on the basis of love. I love K■■■a, or God, and K■■■a loves me. This is our exchange of
feelings.
So in this way, the science of God, even without reading any Vedic literature—of course, that will help
you—if you have deeply studied what is God, you can understand God. Because I am a sample of God,
I am minute particle. Just like the particle of gold is gold. The drop of ocean water is also salty. The
ocean is also salty, you can understand. Similarly, by studying our individuality, by studying our
propensity, we can understand what is God. This is one side.
And here, God personally presents Himself, K■■■a. He says, yad■ yad■ hi dharmas . . . (break) ". . .
the saintly devotees and to kill the demons, I appear." But mind that God is absolute. Either His
deliverance of the devotee or killing of the demons, they are the same thing. Because we learn from the
Vedic literature that demons who are killed by the Personality of Godhead, they also go to the same
salvation, liberation point. Because he is killed by God, he's touched by God.
So it is a great science. It is not a sentiment. It is based on philosophy and authorized vedic literature.
So our only request is that you try to take this movement very seriously and you will be happy. For
happiness, there are three things to understand. That is stated in the Bhagavad-g■t■.
You have to understand only three things, then you become peaceful. What is that? The first thing is
that, "God is enjoyer, I am not enjoyer." But here, our mistake is everyone is thinking, "I am enjoyer."
But actually, we are not enjoyer. For example, because I am part and parcel of God . . . just like my
hand is part and parcel of my body. Suppose the hand catches one nice fruit cake, nice palatable cake.
The hand cannot enjoy it. The hand picks it up and puts it in the mouth. And when the mou . . . it goes
into the stomach, when the energy is created by eating that food, that is enjoyed by the hand. Not only
by this hand—this hand also, the eyes also, legs also.
Similarly, we cannot enjoy anything directly. If we put everything for the enjoyment of God and then
when we take, participate in that enjoyment, that is our healthy life. This is the philosophy. We don't
take anything. Bhagavat-pras■dam. Bhagavat-pras■dam. Our philosophy is that we prepare nice
foodstuff and we offer to K■■■a, and after He has eaten, then we take it. That is our philosophy. We
don't take anything which is not offered to K■■■a. So we are saying God as the supreme enjoyer. We
are not enjoyer. We are all subordinate.
So bhokt■ra■ yajña-tapas■■ sarva-loka-mahe■varam (BG 5.29). And God is proprietor of everything.
That's a fact. Now suppose such big ocean. Are you proprietor? We are claiming that I am proprietor of
this land or this sea. But actually, before my birth the sea was there, the land was there, and after my
death the sea will be there, the land will be there. When I become proprietor? Just like in this hall.
Before we entered this hall, the hall was existing, and when we leave this hall, the hall will exist. Then
when we become proprietor? If we falsely claim that sitting here for one hour or half an hour, we have
become proprietor, that is false impression.
So one has to understand that we are neither proprietor nor enjoyer. Bhokt■ra■ yajña . . . God is the
enjoyer, and God is the proprietor. Sarva-loka-mahe■varam. And suh■da■ sarva-bh■t■n■m (BG
5.29), He's the best friend of everyone. He's not friend only of the human society; He's friend of the
animal society. Because every living entity is God's son. How we can be otherwise treating man in
some way and animal in other way? No. God is actually perfect friend of all living entities. If we simply
understand these three things, then we become peaceful, immediately.
This is the process of ■■nti. You cannot establish . . . if you think that "I am the only son of God, and
the animal is . . . has no soul, and let us kill," that is not a very good philosophy. Why not? What is the
symptoms of possessing soul? The symptoms of possessing soul is the same four formulas—eating,
sleeping, mating and defending. The animals also busy in these four things, we are also busy in these
four things. Then where is the difference between animal and me?
So everything has clear conception in the philosophy of Vedic literature, especially they're summarized
in the Bhagavad-g■t■ As It Is. So our only request is that you become God conscious. This is the
opportunity. This human form of life is the only opportunity to understand what is God, what I am, what
is my relationship with God. The animals—we cannot invite cats and dogs in this meeting. That is not
possible. We have invited human being, because they can understand.
So the human being has got the prerogative, prerogative to understand. Durlabha■ m■nu■a■ janma.
Therefore it is called durlabha, very rarely we have got this human form of life. If we do not try to
understand in this form of life, "What is God, what I am, what is our relationship," then we are
committing suicide. Because after this life, as soon as I give up this body, I'll have to accept another
body. And we do not know what kind of body I am going to accept. That is not in my hands. You cannot
order that "Next life make me a king." That is not possible. If you are actually eligible to become a king,
nature will offer you a body in the king's house. You cannot do that. Therefore, we have to work to get
the next, better body. That is also explained in the Bhagavad-g■t■:
So if we have to prepare ourself in this life for the next body, why not prepare yourself for a body back
to home, back to Godhead. This is K■■■a consciousness movement. We are teaching every man how
he can prepare himself so that after leaving this body, he can go directly to God, back to home, back to
Godhead. This is stated in the Bhagavad-g■t■. Tyaktv■ deha■ punar janma naiti m■m eti kaunteya
(BG 4.9). Tyaktv■ deham, after giving up this . . . (break) . . . we have to give up. I may not like to give
up this body, but I'll have to. That is nature's law. "As sure as death." Before death we must prepare
ourselves, what is next body. If we are not doing that, then we are killing ourselves, committing suicide.
So this K■■■a consciousness movement is to save the human kind from being fatally injured by the
wrong conception of bodily concept of life. And the simple method is by chanting the sixteen words, or if
you are philosopher, if you are scientist, if you want to know everything scientifically, philosophically, we
have got big, big books like this. You can either read books or simply join with us and chant Hare
K■■■a mantra.
Thank you very much. (pause) Yes?
Revat■nandana: Now our spiritual master has finished his lecture, if there are any questions on what
he's been saying . . . don't worry about the dress and marks on the forehead; that we can answer for
you later. But about what my spiritual master has been saying, if there are any questions, you can put
up a hand and I'll convey the question to my spiritual master. So if you have a question, just raise your
hand. Yes? (question is asked) Do we believe in reincarnation? She wants to know if we believe in
reincarnation.
Prabhup■da: I don't follow. That's not question.
Revat■nandana: Hmm? This lady.
■y■masundara: "Do we believe in reincarnation?"
Prabhup■da: Where is the question of believing? It is a fact. It is not a question of belief. It is a fact.
Lady guest: . . . (indistinct)
■y■masundara: (explaining question) "Unless you fully surrender to God, then there's no question of
knowing that."
Prabhup■da: Yes. To go back to Godhead means you don't get this material body. So long you get this
material body, you have to change. That is the material nature. Anything which is material, it has got a
date of birth and it has got a date of annihilation. And in the . . . indistinct . . . there is growth, their (is)
existence. So this body—not only this body; even this material world—it has got a date of creation, and
it will be annihilated.
This is explained in the Bhagavad-g■t■, bh■tv■ bh■tv■ pral■yate (BG 8.19). It comes into
manifestation once, and again it is destroyed. This is material existence. When you go back to home,
back to Godhead, you haven't got to accept this material body. Your spiritual body is already there
within this material body. And in that spiritual body you shall exist along with God. That is the highest
perfection of life.
Revat■nandana: Are there any other questions? Yes?
Guest: . . . (indistinct)
Revat■nandana: Um . . . well, it's an unusual question.
Prabhup■da: Huh?
Revat■nandana: He wants to know if you believe that the Virgin Mary, who is the mother of Jesus, is
the same as P■rvat■.
Prabhup■da: Maybe. We have no objection.
Revat■nandana: Yes? (indistinct question asked) He wants to know more about those who are asleep
and those who are awake in our eyes. "What is a sleeper and who is awake?"
Prabhup■da: One who is not K■■■a conscious or God conscious, he's sleeping.
Revat■nandana: (to guest) He said that one who is not K■■■a conscious, not God conscious, he is
sleeping. His real life is asleep. So being awake in the true sense is to know my relation with God. That
is true life, eternal life. Yes?
Prabhup■da: The Vedic injunction is, utti■■hata j■grata pr■pya var■n nibodhata (Ka■ha Upani■ad
1.3.14), that "You wake up. You have got this chance of human form of body. You take advantage of it."
These are the Vedic instruction. Utti■■hata, "Get up, be awake." J■grata, "Be awakened to
understand your identity." Therefore one who is not trying to understand his identity, spiritual identity,
he's sleeping.
Revat■nandana: Yes? (indistinct question asked) "How can we know ourselves in K■■■a
consciousness? How can we know ourselves through K■■■a consciousness?"
Prabhup■da: That you will know as they have known. These boys, these girls, they had no idea of
K■■■a four years ago. Now they are fully K■■■a conscious. So if you follow their process, you'll
understand what is K■■■a.
Revat■nandana: All right, we'll take one more. Yes? (indistinct question asked) Well, I couldn't quite
follow you. I couldn't hear you distinctly.
Prabhup■da: Why don't you come forward? Come here.
Revat■nandana: Just very loudly and very simply state . . .
Prabhup■da: Or come here. We shall talk with you. Come here. (indistinct statement from man)
Revat■nandana: In other words, you . . . can you say that as a question? If you have a question, we
can answer; otherwise, if you have a philosophy, then we can discuss it later. So what is the question?
(man responds) Well, what is the contradiction? (man responds) Well, his question, it is "Why must we
do something to become God when we're already God?"
Prabhup■da: You are not God, you are dog. Just the opposite. Do you know what is God?
Guest: According to you, we are all parts of God in either language.
Prabhup■da: How you are God? God is the controller. Are you controller? You are controlled.
Therefore the controlled cannot be God. God means controller. Anyone who is controlled, he cannot be
God. Anyone who . . . if one is controller, then He is God.
Guest: Yes, but I am also part of this controller.
Prabhup■da: Therefore you are not absolutely controller. You are both controlled and controller. That
everyone is. Just like you are controller in your family, but you are controlled in the office. Similarly,
everyone is dualistic: he's controller and controlled. But if you find somebody that He's only controller,
not controlled, that is God.
Guest: If God is the controller and I am a part of God, then I'm a controlled part.
Prabhup■da: Yes, part of controller . . . part of God means you have got little power of controlling. But
that you are not absolute controller. (man speaks—indistinct) But first of all you have to ascertain
whether you are absolutely controller or you are controlled. First of all you answer this question. Are
you absolutely controller?
Guest: I am not . . .
Prabhup■da: Therefore nobody is absolutely controller. He's controlled by the laws of nature. How he's
absolutely controller? You are controlled by death, you're controlled by birth, you're controlled by
disease, you're controlled by old age. How you became controller? So therefore you are not God.
Revat■nandana: All right. (applause) So if you have further discussion, you can discuss further later.
After the program, we'll be all around to talk with you. For now, any more questions, it becomes difficult
to follow. If there's any more questions, we'll take them after the next . . . this chant now.
So just like my spiritual master is inviting, that if you want to further understand this philosophy, you can
discuss with us, and we have got many volumes of books. But you may not be very philosophically
inclined, but anyone can experience K■■■a and K■■■a consciousness just by chanting this simple
mantra with the names of God: Hare K■■■a, Hare K■■■a, K■■■a K■■■a, Hare Hare/ Hare R■ma,
Hare R■ma, R■ma R■ma, Hare Hare.
And now, for concluding the formal part of the program, we're going to chant this Hare K■■■a mantra
and invite you all to join in and experience K■■■a in the form of His name, this transcendental sound.
Just chant Hare K■■■a with us, and then afterward, if there are more questions or you want to see our
literatures—we have so many books here—we can do that. But for now, please, for few minutes make
an experiment in K■■■a consciousness by chanting this mantra.
(k■rtana)
Prabhup■da: (prema-dhvani) Thank you very much.
Devotees: All glories to ■r■ Guru and Gauranga. (obeisances)
Revat■nandana: All glories to ■r■ Guru and ■r■ Gaur■■ga. All glories to ■r■la Prabhup■da. (loud
applause) Jaya. Haribol. Hari-haribol. So my Godbrothers will bring around a little bit of fruit to you, the
pras■da, full of . . . fruit offered to K■■■a, and up here at the front is a table of books and literatures,
and if you have any interest in them you can come up, and there's also another book table, I think, set
up in the back lobby there. We have small and large books, simple things you can read to understand
more about K■■■a consciousness, and you can taste a little pras■da.
And for now I think we'll have a little more k■rtana. We'll just keep on chanting for a little while, and
invite you to join and chant some more. And then after this chant is finished then if you have any more
questions, my Godbrothers will be here. (devotee speaks aside) Oh, yes. We have a temple in
Edinburgh. We haven't got one in Glasgow yet. That will be coming up, hopefully, next year.
But we have one at 14 Forrest Rd, in Greyfriars part of Edinburgh, 14 Forrest Rd. You can visit that
temple any time in Edinburgh, if you happen to be visiting Edinburgh; we invite everybody to come by.
Hopefully, some time next year we'll have another temple . . . a temple here in Glasgow also. I think
you'll like to have a temple here.
So now we're going to have some more k■rtana, chanting Hare K■■■a. On your way out, stop at the
book table in the front or in the back, and take some literature. And be sure you don't go before you
have a little bit of fruit, pras■da offered to K■■■a.
(k■rtana) (aside) Somebody get some kart■ls. Come on. Don't go. Kart■ls. Svayambh■r? (k■rtana)
Please join in chanting. Everybody chant for a while. Come on, chant Hare K■■■a. (k■rtana) (end)
