Prabhup■da: (prema-dhvani) Thank you very much.
■r■ bhagav■n uv■ca
Our this K■■■a consciousness movement, it is not something new, imaginary movement. It is very old
movement. At least five thousand years ago this Bhagavad-g■t■ was repeated by Lord K■■■a in the
Battlefield of Kuruk■etra. Before that, as it is stated in the Bhagavad-g■t■, Fourth Chapter,
K■■■a said to Arjuna that "This science of understanding God, long, long ago I spoke to the sun god
Vivasv■n." In the Vedic scripture we understand that every planet is inhabited by living entities. The
sun is also one of the planets, and there are living entities. Otherwise how K■■■a could go there and
speak the predominating person, Vivasv■n? The name of the person is also given, ima■ vivasvate
yoga■ proktav■n aham avyayam (BG 4.1). And vivasv■n manave pr■ha. Vivasv■n, the sun god . . .
because in the higher planetary system the sun planet, moon planet and many, many other planets,
they are called the heavenly planets. The inhabitants in those planets are very opulent. The material
happiness available in those planets are hundreds and thousand times better than in this planet.
So it is confirmed in the Bhagavad-g■t■ that sun planet is also inhabited by living beings. But their
body is made of fire. That is the difference. Just like here our body is made of earth. Earth, air . . . earth,
water, air, fire, ether—these are the five material elements. In some planet the earth is prominent; in
some planet the water is prominent; in other planet the fire is prominent. So this is the creation of God,
different varieties. That is confirmed in the Bhagavad-g■t■:
This material world, composed of many millions of universes, that is one fourth creation of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Ek■■■ena sthito jagat (BG 10.42). So Bhagavad-g■t■ means to understand
what is God, the science of God. And God Himself is speaking about Himself. Otherwise it is not
possible to understand what is God.
So if we carefully understand the ■lokas and the passages mentioned in the Bhagavad-g■t■, we can
understand what is God. And the human form of life is meant for understanding God. He has no other
business. The lower bodies, less than the human form of body . . . according to Darwin theory, the
human form of body comes from monkey . . . but the evolution is accepted in the Vedic literature, but
not like Darwin’s. The evolution according to Vedic scripture is that the living entity is different from the
body. And the living entity is passing through many forms of body. We shall read that.
So the body are according to my desire. I am desiring something, just like here we are sitting, so many
ladies and gentlemen, but not one of them is similar to anyone else. They have got different bodies.
That body is created according to one’s desire. The mind, the subtle mind is the creator of the next
body. Ya■ ya■ v■pi smaran bh■va■ tyajaty ante kalevaram (BG 8.6). At the time of death, whatever I
am thinking, a similar body will be offered to me by the laws of nature. Subtle body. The mind,
intelligence and ego, they are subtle body and the gross body is made of earth, water, air, fire, ether.
So when we give up this gross body, the subtle body carries me to another gross body. This is the way
of transmigration of the soul. The prak■ti, nature . . . nature’s law is very strict and stringent. The nature
will immediately offer you a similar body according to the thinking at the time of your death, tath■
deh■ntara-pr■ptir (BG 2.13).
Therefore this human form of body is meant for going back to home, back to Godhead. Yad gatv■ na
nivartante tad dh■ma parama■ mama (BG 15.6). We are eternal. As God is eternal we are also eternal
because we are part and parcel of God. As God is always blissful, jolly, similarly our nature is always
blissful and jolly. Sac-cid-■nanda-vigraha■ (Bs 5.1). Sac-cid-■nanda. Sat means eternal and cit
means blissful . . . cit means full of knowledge, and ■nanda, ■nanda means blissfulness. That is our
nature. Therefore we want to live, we do not wish to die. We do not wish to . . . nobody wishes to die but
we are forced to death. That is our punishment. nitya■ ■■■vato ’ya■ na hanyate hanyam■ne ■ar■re
(BG 2.20). This instruction is given in the Bhagavad-g■t■, that the living entity is eternal, ■■■vata,
very very old. Nitya■ ■■■vato ’ya■ na hanyate hanyam■ne ■ar■re. When the body is destroyed, is
annihilated, the soul exists, it goes to another body. The example is just like everyone of us . . . in the
first day of intercourse of the father and mother, the secretion mixed together, emulsified, and if the
living entity is allowed to enter into that, it grows. That is the beginning of our body. But if the living
entity is not allowed into the, that emulsified small pea-like bod then there is no pregnancy.
So attempt is made to pollute that emulsification, therefore the living entity cannot enter into it and there
is no pregnancy. Otherwise there must be pregnancy. Then that pea-like body grows and in seven
month it grows the hands and legs and heads and everything and consciousness comes back. When
we die our consciousness becomes almost stopped and we lie down within the womb of the mother
according to species of body, take it for granted our human form of body. Seven months, at that time
the body is grown up, and in this way in tenth month the body is fully grown, then by nature’s way the
body comes out and another life begins. This is called transmigration of the soul.
So actually we are eternal. In the Vedic language it is said:
Nitya, nitya means eternal, and nity■n■■, nity■n■■ means plural number of nitya. So there are many
nityas, many living entities, but there is one nitya, Supreme, that is God. He is also a living entity like us.
Then what is the difference? The difference is, we learn from the Vedic . . . (indistinct) . . . eko
bah■n■■ yo vidadh■ti k■m■n. That singular number nitya, eternal, maintains the plural number of
nityas. We are within the plural number, nity■n■■.
So the conclusion is that God is the Supreme Being and we are living being. So our relation is very
intimate - qualitatively we are one because we are part and parcel. So God is eternal, full of knowledge
and blissful. Therefore our position is also the same, but in minute quantity. His knowledge is great,
therefore God is great. Our knowledge is limited. Because we have got limited potencies, therefore we
are called living entity - and God has got unlimited potencies, therefore God is great and we are small.
This is the conclusion of the Bhagavad Gita, and we are in this material world being contaminated by
the material nature. We are suffering, because anything material it has got limited period of existence.
Anything you take, it is asat. Asat means which will not exist and sat means which will exist. The Vedic
injunction is, asato m■ sad gama. "You are sat, you revive your eternal life. Don’t be entangled in this
asat."
So we are transmigrating from one body to another. There is evolution.
Because in the beginning the whole planet was covered in water. The water is drying up and gradually
land is coming out. So therefore in the beginning the aquatics: jalaj■ nava-lak■■■i. So the aquatic
animals, they are 900,000 species. Jalaj■ nava . . . sth■var■ lak■a-vi■■ati: then trees and plants and
herbs and grasses and so many, they are 2,000,000 forms. Then k■mayo rudra-sa■khyak■■: then
insect life, reptile life, 1,100,000. Then pak■i■■■ da■a-lak■a■am: then birds, varieties of birds,
1,000,000. Then pa■u, four-legged animals, 3,000,000 types. Then m■nu■■■ catur-lak■■■i: then
human form of life, uncivilized and civilized, that human form of life, 400,000.
So in comparison to the lower species of life, we are very small quantity. Together there are 8,400,000
species of life, living entities. The evolution process is from one body to another, another, another. In
this way, when you come to the human form of life, it should be utilized for full knowledge about our
eternal life. That is the opportunity. And if we don't take this opportunity, if we live like other
animals—eating, sleeping, sex and fearfulness, ■h■ra-nidr■-bhayam—but we do not care to
understand what we are, what is God, what is our relationship with God, then we are missing the point.
That lesson, instruction, is given in the Bhagavad-g■t■. And it is very easy to understand. The
perplexity which Arjuna met at the battle, in the Battlefield of Kuruk■etra . . . the fight was between two
sector of family members. They're cousin-brothers, one family, but there was some trouble, who would
occupy the throne. From Mah■bh■rata we understand that the P■■■avas, at least up to Mah■r■ja
Par■k■it, he ruled over the whole world. Bh■ratavar■a means the whole world, and the capital was
here, Hastin■pura. This information we get, Mah■bh■rata. Mah■ means greater, and bh■rata means
India. Mah■bh■rata.
So there was trouble, who will occupy the throne. So there was fight. So when fight was arranged, then
Arjuna . . . he was a devotee of K■■■a. (aside) Please stop. He declined to fight. He said to K■■■a,
"My dear K■■■a"—K■■■a was his friend—"I don't like this fight because they are my
cousin-brothers. Although they have usurped my kingdom, let them enjoy it. I don't wish to fight with
them." But K■■■a declined. K■■■a said, "No, you have to fight. Your duty is to fight."
Then Arjuna placed before Him so many ideas, that "If I kill my brother, then my brothers' wives will be
widow and they may be polluted, then unwanted children, var■a-sa■kara, will come out, and when the
var■a-sa■kara population is filling, then the whole world becomes a hell." So many arguments.
So K■■■a, when He saw that Arjuna is very much afflicted with the material ideas, so He wanted to
teach him this Bhagavad-g■t■. So first punishment . . . not punishment, chastisement. Because Arjuna
accepted that "The perplexities which I am facing is not possible to be solved except Yourself." He
knew that K■■■a is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
So he surrendered himself to K■■■a, ■i■yas te 'ha■ ■■dhi m■■ prapannam,
k■rpa■ya-do■opahata svabh■va■ (BG 2.7): "I am a k■atriya. It is my duty to fight in right cases, and I
am declining. This is my weakness. So kindly instruct me how I can give up this weakness. I am
accepting You as my guru." ■i■yas te 'ham. ■i■ya means who voluntarily accepts to be ruled by a
person who is guru. He is called ■i■ya.
So Arjuna and K■■■a, they were friends, but still, to take right instruction without any argument, he
accepted He is guru. Then after the acceptance K■■■a's first warning is,
"My dear Arjuna, you are talking like a very learned man, but the subject matter which you have
touched is not at all taken seriously by the pa■■ita." Pa■■ita means learned man. That means, "You
are talking like a fool. You are taking this body as self."
So actually this is not the fact. The body is not the self. The self is different. If you analyze this body,
what you will find? Suppose we are breathing. What is this breathing? It is air only. Now, when the
breathing is stopped, a man is dead. Now you are so much advanced in science, why don't you replace
this breathing? It is nothing but air. So you can manufacture some machine working in electric battery,
and put some air and fix up, and that same air will come: woosh, woosh, woosh, woosh. Will that give
you life? No. Even if you artificially bring breathing, just like nowadays they, with oxygen gas, as if
oxygen gas is life . . . that is not the fact.
So if you analyze every part of the body, then you will find that there is no life. This is called education.
This is called scientific knowledge. Simply abruptly taking something without any proper understanding,
that is not knowledge. Therefore K■■■a chastised him that "You are talking like very scientific, learned
scholar, but you are a fool number one because you are accepting this material body as the self." This
is ignorance.
This is confirmed in another place, yasy■tma-buddhi■ ku■ape tri-dh■tuke (SB 10.84.13). This
ku■ape, this bag of three elements, kapha, pitta, v■yu, or, take it, the skin, muscle, veins, bones, urine,
stool, blood—what you will find if you dissect this body? They are all material things. What is blood? It is
also water, red water. The urine, this is also water. And this bone, bone is nothing but earth hardened. If
you take plaster of paris . . . they sometimes show artificial bone also in the medical college. But that is
not. That is bone. That is earth. So do you think this combination of this earth, water, air, fire is life? Can
you produce life? You take . . . you can get enough earth, water, air, fire, stool, urine, blood. You
manufacture one life. That you cannot do. This is called analysis. And those who are engaged in
understanding the self as the combination of these earth, water, air, fire—sa eva go-khara■ (SB
10.84.13). Such persons are defined in the ■■stra as no more intelligent than the cows and the asses.
So from here spiritual knowledge begins. You analyze the body, but you won't find the real soul or real
life, although it is within you. But why you cannot find? It is very, very small. Ke■■gra-■ata-bh■gasya
■atadh■ kalpitasya ca (CC Madhya 19.140). The formation of the soul, measurement of the soul, is
very, very . . . it is smaller than the atom. Ke■■gra-■ata-bh■gasya. The tip of the hair you divide into
hundred part, and take one part, again divide it into hundred parts. That one part is the measurement of
the soul. That means one ten-thousandth part of the top of the hair. So how you can see? But that small
particle is giving you living force. This knowledge we get from Bhagavad-g■t■, and that is the fact. You
cannot get life by analyzing this material body. That is not possible. You have to find out what is that
small particle. You have to hear. Therefore you cannot get knowledge by your material activities. You
have to hear it from the authorities; otherwise there is no possibility.
Just like you cannot understand who is your father. You have to take the knowledge from your mother.
If mother certifies, "This gentleman is your father," that is correct. But if you go on researching who is
your father you will never be able to know who is your father. Similarly, what is life, what is soul, what is
our this body, what is the ultimate goal of life, why you are suffering—all this knowledge you have to
take from the higher authorities. That is called Vedic process, not to endeavor by research. What you
can research? Our fund of knowledge is very, very poor, limited. You cannot have perfect knowledge
unless you hear from the authority. So K■■■a is the authority. Our K■■■a consciousness movement
means you take knowledge from the best authority. Don't manufacture knowledge. That will not help
you. That is K■■■a consciousness movement.
So here K■■■a says that "My dear Arjuna, you are talking like a very learned man." That is our
disease. Everyone will talk as if . . . we manufacture, but that is useless. Ke ■mi kene ■m■ya j■re . . .
(CC Madhya 20.102). You cannot make any solution. Therefore the whole world is in chaotic condition.
We speak of our own country, India. Not only India, everywhere the chaotic condition is, because they
have no real knowledge. They are simply claiming to be very learned man, which is chastised here by
K■■■a. A■ocy■n anva■ocas tva■ prajñ■-v■d■n (BG 2.11): "You are presenting yourself as very
learned man, but the subject matter which you have taken, this body, this body is nothing but dead
lump of matter." That is said here, that a■ocy■n anva■ocas tva■ gat■s■n agat■s■■■ ca. This body,
when it is living condition . . . living condition means so long the soul is there, it looks like very bright,
beautiful, moving here and there. And when the soul leaves this body, then what it is? It has no value, a
lump of matter.
Just like a motorcar. So long it is moving, it is worth one lakh, and so long it does not move, it is simply
lump of iron and copper and something. Who cares for it? It is thrown away. Same thing. The body has
no value. It has value so long the soul is there. Otherwise, suppose a big man . . . they are lamenting,
"Such a great man has passed away." But what is that such great man? He is lying on the floor, on the
bed, the same man. So why you are seeing that he has gone? Then who has gone? You have never
seen him who has gone. This is knowledge. So our human life is meant for understanding what has
gone from the body which makes the body a lump of matter . . . (break)
Dv■pare paricary■y■■ kalau tad dhari-k■rtan■t (SB 12.3.52). In the Satya-yuga, when the duration of
life was very, very great, meditation was possible. And next yuga? K■te yad dhy■yato vi■■u■
tret■y■■ yajato makhai■ (SB 12.3.52): by performing the ritualistic ceremonies recommended in the
Vedas, yajña. And the next yuga, by paricarya, by Deity worship. And next yuga, this Kali-yuga,
hari-k■rtan■t: simply by chanting the holy name of the Lord. Otherwise . . . and meditation means k■te
yad dhy■yato vi■■um. Meditation means to think of Vi■■u, Lord Vi■■u. That is the recommendation.
Dhy■n■vasthita-tad-gatena manas■ pa■yanti ya■ yogina■ (SB 12.13.1). The yog■s, they think of the
Supreme Person, dhy■n■vasthita manas■, mind absorbed, surcharged with thinking of Vi■■u. That is
called meditation. Dhy■n■vasthita-tad-gatena manas■ pa■yanti ya■ yogina■. And in the
Bhagavad-g■t■ this dhy■na is recommended in the Sixth Chapter:
Any yog■ . . . there are different varieties of yog■s. So of all the yog■s, the bhakti-yog■ who is
thinking of K■■■a within the mind, he is the first-class yog■. So in our movement we are creating
first-class yog■s because they are chanting Hare K■■■a, Hare K■■■a, K■■■a K■■■a, Hare Hare/
Hare R■ma, Hare R■ma, R■ma R■ma, Hare Hare. So this is directly to create first-class yog■s.
Yogin■m api sarve■■m.
Indian: Sw■m■j■, in our ancient books K■■■a has also been projected as a person who has lived for
a certain period of history, and who was associated with number of . . .
Prabhup■da: Friends and relatives.
Indian: . . . relatives for temporary time. Our books of literature also projected the Supreme Being as
the perfect one. How do you reconcile the two facts? How do we accept that . . . your teachings are
based on the assumption that that person who lived for that period of time is the perfect person. But
how do you fundamentally assure that what He has said is correct? How do you reconcile the two
points?
Prabhup■da: That I have already explained, that one has to understand K■■■a, janma karma me
divya■ yo j■n■ti tattvata■ (BG 4.9). Before your asking I have already explained, that if that person
K■■■a, whom you think that He lived for a certain period with friends and relatives just like ordinary
man, if you simply study what is this person, then you'll become perfect. Janma karma ca me divya■ yo
j■n■ti tattvata■. To understand Him in fact, it is not so easy. That is also explained in the
Bhagavad-g■t■:
Out of many millions of persons, one becomes siddha, perfect. So that perfection is not complete
perfection. That perfection means aha■ brahm■smi: "I am not this material body; I am spirit soul." So
one who understands this position of oneself is calculated as perfect. But yatat■m api siddh■n■m (BG
7.3), in that perfect stage if one endeavors to understand K■■■a, yatat■m api siddh■n■■ ka■cid, out
of many such millions of persons who trying to understand K■■■a in perfection, one may understand.
So it is not so easy. Janma karma ca me divya■ yo j■n■ . . . (BG 4.9), again tattvata■. But that factual
understanding is possible. How it is possible? Bhakty■ m■m abhij■n■ti y■v■n ya■ c■smi tattvata■
(BG 18.55). Only through devotion you can understand.
So these problems will be solved when you become a devotee. Then K■■■a will reveal. Ata■
■r■-k■■■a-n■m■di na bhaved gr■hyam indriyai■ (CC Madhya 17.136). If you try to understand that
Supreme Person, K■■■a, who comes before you as ordinary person, you can understand Him if you
become His devotee. Otherwise it is not possible. Ata■ ■r■-k■■■a-n■m■di. You cannot understand
K■■■a or His name, His form, His pastimes, His activities—na bhaved gr■hyam indriyai■—by your
imperfect senses. But sevonmukhe hi jihv■dau svayam eva sphuraty (Bhakti-ras■m■ta-sindhu
1.2.234): when you are engaged in His service, then He reveals Himself, "Here I am." So this is the
process. If you want to understand that person, K■■■a, who is accepted as the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, then you have to take shelter of bhakti-yoga and associate with bhaktas. Then it is
possible. Otherwise not.
Indian (2): Pra■■mas, Sw■m■j■.
Prabhup■da: Hare K■■■a.
Indian (2): Shri Gandhij■ was also great admirer of the G■t■ and a great scholar and a great . . .
(indistinct) . . . made commentary also. But he, at the time of the great war, asked the great powers to
let Hitler come in and not fight him at all. But where have you . . . he said that Hitler . . . the change of
heart, that would be effective, and not that punishment. That means punishment is a fault, and I would
like your enlightenment on this paradox.
Prabhup■da: The punishment . . . K■■■a does not personally punish. He has got many agents. Just
like in the government, the president does not punish directly, but there are many departments.
Similarly, par■sya ■aktir vividhaiva ■r■yate (CC Madhya 13.65, purport, ■vet■■vatara Upani■ad
6.8). His potencies are manyfold. One of the potency is this material nature. It is called m■y■. That is
explained in the Bhagavad-g■t■: daiv■ hy e■■ gu■amay■ mama m■y■ duratyay■ (BG 7.14). It is
very difficult to surpass the jurisdiction of m■y■, duratyay■. But punishment will not be excused.
Ignorance of law is no excuse.
Similarly, this m■y■, this material nature, is very, very strong. If you eat little more . . . your nature is to
eat, say, two ounce. If you eat three ounce, immediately you'll be punished; there will be indigestion.
The nature is so strong. Therefore it is called daiv■ hy e■■ gu■amay■ mama m■y■ duratyay■. So in
this way you cannot surpass the stringent laws of m■y■. But if you want to avoid punishment, then you
take shelter of K■■■a. M■m eva ye prapadyante m■y■m et■■ taranti te (BG 7.14). Therefore
K■■■a consciousness is essential. If we become K■■■a conscious, if we follow the instruction of
K■■■a, then there is no question of being harassed by the stringent laws of m■y■. This is the
process.
Indian (3): President Jagadish, it is customary . . . (end)
