Pradyumna: O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo
bhagavate v■sudev■ya. (leads chanting of verse) (Prabhup■da and devotees repeat)
na—nor; ca—also; ■aknomi—am I able; avasth■tum—to stay; bhramati—forgetting; iva—as; ca—and;
me—my; mana■—mind; nimitt■ni—causes; ca—also; pa■y■mi—I foresee; vipar■t■ni—just the
opposite; ke■ava—O killer of the demon Ke■■ (K■■■a).
Translation: "I am now unable to stand here any longer. I am forgetting myself, and my mind is reeling. I
foresee only evil, O killer of the Ke■i demon."
Prabhup■da: So vipar■t■ni. Nimitt■ni ca pa■y■mi vipar■t■ni ke■ava. Vipar■t■ni means "Just the
opposite." "I have come here to fight to regain my kingdom. That is the cause for which I have come
here to fight. But actually I am seeing it is just the opposite. My fighting will be useless. I came here to
fight for some useful purpose, but now I see that vipar■t■ni, just opposite. It will be useless." Why
useless?
Because one tries to become rich man, opulent—this is material nature—just to show to his relatives, to
his friends, to his family members, "Just see how I have become rich, opulent." This is the psychology.
A man works very hard day and night to become rich just to make a show that, "My dear friends, my
dear relatives, you see that how I have become now rich." This is the only purpose.
Nobody is working hard for serving K■■■a. This is m■y■. And K■■■a consciousness means the
same hardship we shall take, but take for K■■■a. Just like our Mrs. Sharma. She was working in the
family, but now she has come to work for K■■■a. And this is salvation. This is mukti. Not that we have
to stop our working capacity. Simply we have to change the position. In the family life we work
uselessly for so-called relatives, but the same labor, when we employ for the service of K■■■a, every
inch of it is utilized.
There is song by Govinda d■sa, ■■ta ■tapa b■ta bari■a■a e dina j■min■ j■gi re, biphale sevinu
k■pa■a durajana, capala sukha-laba l■gi re (Bhajah■ Re Mana, 2). He says that ■■ta ■tapa b■ta
bari■a■a: "I have worked without caring for scorching heat and severe cold." Actually people work so
hard. He has to go to office. Suppose there is snowfall. So he cannot stop. He has to go. Or there is
scorching heat. You have no experience in your country, scorching heat, but India, 122 degrees, just
imagine, this year.
Still they have to go to work. So somewhere it is severe cold and somewhere it is severe scorching
heat. This is nature's law. You have to suffer. While you are in cold country, you think that, "India is very
warm. They are very happy." (laughs) And in India they are thinking, "In England they are very happy."
This is the way.
This is illusion. Nobody thinks that there is no happiness within these three worlds, beginning from
Brahmaloka down to the P■t■laloka. ■brahma-bhuvan■l lok■■ punar ■vartino 'rjuna (BG 8.16).
There is no happiness. Even if you go to the Brahmaloka and get the opportunity of living like Brahm■,
millions of years, and thousand times better standard of life, still it is not happiness. They do not know
it.
Janma-m■tyu-jar■-vy■dhi-du■kha-do■■nudar■anam (BG 13.9). Therefore, mad-dh■ma gatv■
punar janma na vidyate. Therefore our aim should be only how to go back to home, back to Godhead.
That should be.
So nimitt■ni vipar■t■ni. This vipar■t■ni, when we are materially conscious, we see that, "Without
happiness of myself, my family, my society, my country, my community . . ." They think happiness in
terms of expanded selfishness. First of all, "My happiness, personal." Just like a child: it does not think
of anyone's happiness. Whatever he takes, he wants to eat. So you, as we grow, we expand our
happiness little more, "My happiness, my brother's happiness, my family's happiness, my community's
happiness," or "my nation's happiness." So you can go on expanding the scope of happiness, but there
is no happiness. There is no happiness. These foolish persons, they do not know.
So Arjuna also is playing like an ordinary, foolish person. Nimitt■ni vipar■t■ni. "Where is my
happiness? I came here to fight, to get happiness, and I have to kill my own kinsmen. Then where is my
happiness? I cannot enjoy the property or the kingdom alone. There must be relatives, brothers. I will
be very proud: 'Just see how I have become king.' So if they are dying, then who . . . whom I shall show
my opulence?" This is the psychology. Nimitt■ni ca vipar■t■ni pa■y■mi. Just the opposite. This is
illusion. This is illusion.
There is no happiness actually; expanding selfishness. Just like a national leader like Mahatma Gandhi
in our country, he planned that "Let the Britishers go away. My countrymen will be happy. My
countrymen will be happy." But when the Britishers went away, giving the responsibility of Indian
empire to the Indian people, Gandhi was thinking in the morning, "Oh, I am so unhappy. Now only
death will please me." And the next . . . the same evening, he was killed. He was so unhappy. Because
everything was topsy-turvied. He wanted Hindu-Muslim unity. Now the country was divided. The
Muslim became separated. The whole program was changed. There were so many things. He wanted
that the government should be very simplified, but he saw that his disciples, his followers, were after
office, simply for office. So nimitt■ni. He saw that, "I shall be happy, my countrymen will be happy," but
at the end he saw vipar■t■ni, all opposite.
Everyone will experience that. So long he will be materially attached, he will find vipar■t■ni. "I wanted
to be . . ." Sukhera l■giy■, e ghara bandhinu, agu■e puriy■ gel■: "I constructed this nice house for
living happily, but there was fire, and everything finished." This is the way. You construct everything for
happiness, but there will be something which will put you into the most miserable condition. This is
called material world. They do not know.
Therefore one who is intelligent, he thinks that, "If I have to work so hard for so-called happiness, and
here is K■■■a is canvassing, asking me that 'You work for Me,' so why not work for K■■■a? Here I
see vipar■t■ni, everything is opposite. There is no happiness." So that is intelligence. "I have to work
hard. K■■■a says, 'Just surrender unto Me.' " Sarva-dharm■n parityajya m■m eka■ ■ara■a■ vraja
(BG 18.66). So K■■■a is asking to work for Him, giving up everything. That is clear, everyone knows.
"Here also I am working very hard, but here I am working hard to be happy, but the vipar■t■ni, I am
becoming unhappy. So why not work for K■■■a?" This is intelligence.
I have to work, after all. J■vera svar■pa haya nitya-k■■■era d■sa (CC Madhya 20.108-109).
Constitutionally, every living entity is a servant. He's serving, eternal servant of K■■■a. If he does not
serve K■■■a, then he will have to become servant of m■y■. That's all. His servitude, servantship, will
not go. ■he■ki svarga gele sva-dharm■n. ■he■ki . . . just like a ■he■ki, you do not understand, the
husking machine. Say a typewriter. So if you send the typewriter to the heaven, what does it mean? It is
to be worked as typewriter. Does it mean because it has gone to heaven, the work has changed? No.
The work will continue. Either in this hell or heaven, typewriter will kat-kat-kat-kat-kat. That's all.
Similarly, our position is servant. If you don't become servant of K■■■a, then you serve . . . you
become servant of your wife, your children, your relative, your country, your nation, your dog. At last, if
you have no family, then you become servant of your dog. You know in your country it is very usual. If
he has nobody, then he keeps a dog and takes it on the street. His dog passes stool, and he is
standing, waiting "Yes, sir. You pass your stool, I am waiting." Just see. It is practical. If you don't
become servant of K■■■a, then you have to become servant of the dog. This is nature's way.
Therefore intelligent person will take lesson from it, that "I have to become servant. Why not become
K■■■a's servant? Then I will be happy. There are so many K■■■a's servant; they are so happy. Why
shall I remain the servant of the m■y■?" K■m■d■n■■ katidh■.
So we remain servant of m■y■ on account of my sense gratification. That's all. I remain servant of my
wife because I want to satisfy my senses. I want to remain servant of my husband because I want
sense gratification. Here is the disease, everyone. Even the servant of the servant or servant of the dog
(CC Madhya 13.80), because I like it, a pet dog. So actually, instead of becoming master, we become
servant. This is the fact. And servant of whom? K■m■d■n■■ kati na katidh■ p■lit■ durnide■■■ (Brs.
3.2.35, CC Madhya 22.16). Servant of lust, servants of greediness. K■ma, krodha, moha, m■tsarya.
Servant of all these senses.
Therefore one who is intelligent . . . there was a br■hma■a. He said like this, "My dear Lord K■■■a, I
am now servant. I have served so much." K■m■d■n■■ kati na katidh■ durnide■■■. "I have served
them so nicely that I had to execute something which is abominable." If you become servant of
somebody, if he says that "You have to do it," your conscience does not allow you to do it, still, you
have to do it. Still you have to do it. A man is stealing for family. He does not like to steal. Still, he is in
need of money; he has to steal. K■m■d■n■■ kati na katidh■ p■lit■ durnide■■■. This is study, study
the psychological condition. When I become servant of m■y■, even I do not wish to do something
which is not very good, still I am obliged to do it. But the result is that nobody is satisfied.
The same example: Just like Gandhi served his country so much, so nicely, so voluntarily. Still, the
result was he was killed by his countrymen. Just see. Result was . . . the reward was that he served his
country so much. It is undoubtedly, nobody can serve so sincerely. Everybody knows. But the result
was even a person like Mahatma Gandhi was killed by his countrymen. Just this morning Mrs. Sharma
was telling that she has worked so much for the family, but still, the sons and daughters, they want,
"No, no, you cannot go. You serve us. Serve us." They are not satisfied yet. They will never be
satisfied. You serve m■y■, the m■y■ will never be satisfied. Te■■■ na karu■■ j■ta na trap■
nopa■■nti.
The intelligent man is speaking, "My dear Lord, I have served my senses—lust, anger, greediness—so
much so. Still, they are not kind upon me. They are still dictating, still dictating, 'Do this, do this, do this,
do this.' Therefore," samprata■ labdha buddhi, " now I have got intelligence by Your grace."
Guru-k■■■a-k■pay■ (CC Madhya 19.151). "By the grace of my spiritual master, by the grace of
yourself, I have got this intelligence. Now I have come to You, to serve. Kindly engage me." This is
surrender. "I have served my senses, lust, greediness and other things so faithfully. They are not
satisfied. They still want me to serve. They are not going to give me pension. They want still, 'Oh, what
you have done? You have to do so many things.' So now I am disgusted." This is called vair■gya.
Vair■gya. Jñ■na-vair■gya-yuktay■ (SB 1.2.12). This is required. In human life, this is, this intelligence
required, vair■gya, not to serve this material world, but to serve K■■■a. The M■y■v■d■
philosophers, they simply stop these material activities. Just like Buddha philosophy, nirv■■a. He
simply advises to stop this. But after stopping, what is, sir? "No, zero. Zero." That cannot be. That is not
possible. This is their mistake. But the people to whom Buddha philosophy was preached, they were
not so intelligent that there can be better service after giving up this service. Therefore Lord Buddha
said, "You stop this service, you become happy, because ultimately everything is zero." ■■nyav■d■.
Nirvi■e■av■d■.
The M■y■v■d■s . . . there are two kinds of M■y■v■d■: the impersonalists and the voidists. They are
all M■y■v■d■. So their philosophy is good so far, because a foolish man cannot understand more
than this. A foolish man, if he is informed that there is better life in the spiritual world, to become servant
of God, K■■■a, they think, "I became servant of this material world. I have suffered so much. Again
servant of K■■■a? Ohhh . . ." They shudder, "Oh, no, no. This is not good. This is not good." As soon
as they hear of service, they think of this service, this nonsense service. They cannot think of that there
is service, but there is simply ■nanda. One is still more eager to serve Him, K■■■a. That is spiritual
world. That they cannot understand.
So these nirvi■e■av■d■, impersonalist, they think like that. Just like a diseased man lying on the bed,
and if he is informed that, "When you will be cured, you will be able to eat nicely, you will be able to
walk," he thinks that "Again walking? Again eating?" Because he is accustomed to eat bitter medicine
and s■bud■n■, not very palatable, and so many things, passing stool and urine, activities on the bed.
So as soon as they inform that, "After being cured there is also passing of stool and urine and eating,
but that is very palatable," he cannot understand. He says: "It is something like this."
So the M■y■v■d■ impersonalist, they cannot understand that serving K■■■a is simply pleasure and
blissful. They cannot understand. Therefore they become impersonalist: "No. The Absolute Truth
cannot be person." That is another side of the Buddha philosophy. Impersonal means zero. That is also
zero. So Buddhist philosophy, they also make the ultimate goal zero, and these M■y■v■d■s, they also
make the ultimate goal . . . na te vidu■ sv■rtha-gati■ hi vi■■um (SB 7.5.31). They do not understand
that there is life, blissful life, by serving K■■■a.
Therefore, here Arjuna is playing just like ordinary man. So he says to K■■■a, "You wanted me to
fight, to become happy, to get the kingdom, but by killing my own men? Oh, nimitt■ni vipar■t■ni. You
are misleading me." Nimitt■ni ca pa■y■mi vipar■t■ni. "I'll not be happy by killing my own men. That is
not possible. How You are inducing me?" So he said, nimitt■ni ca vipar■t■ni pa■y■mi. "No, no." Na
ca ■aknomy avasth■tum: "I cannot stand here. Let me go back. Take my chariot back. I'll not stay
here." Na ca ■aknomy avasth■tu■ bhramat■va ca . . . (BG 1.30): "I am becoming bewildered. I am
puzzled now."
So this is the position, material world. We are always in problem, puzzle, and when something better is
proposed to the materialistic person that, "You take to K■■■a consciousness, you'll be happy," he
sees nimitt■ni vipar■t■ni, just opposite. "What this K■■■a consciousness I shall happy? My family is
in trouble," or "I have got so many problems. What this K■■■a consciousness will help me?" Nimitt■ni
ca vipar■t■ni. This is material condition of life.
Therefore it requires time, little time to understand. That is Bhagavad-g■t■. The same Arjuna, he is
now finding, nimitt■ni ca vipar■t■ni. When he will understand Bhagavad-g■t■, he will say: "Yes,
K■■■a, what You are saying, it is right. It is right." Because after instructing Arjuna, K■■■a will ask
him, "Now what you want to do?" Because K■■■a does not force. K■■■a says that, "You surrender
unto Me." He does not force that, "You must surrender. I am God. You are My part and parcel." No,
He'll never say that. Because He has given you little independence, He will not touch it. Otherwise what
is the difference between a stone and a living entity? A living entity must have independence, although
it is very little, minute. That K■■■a does not touch. He'll never touch. You'll have to agree, "Yes,
K■■■a, I shall surrender unto You. Yes. That is for my benefit."
This is K■■■a consciousness. You must voluntarily agree—not hackneyed, mechanical: "Spiritual
master says like this. All right, let me do it." No. You have to understand very nicely. Te■■■
satata-yukt■n■■ bhajat■■ pr■ti-p■rvakam (BG 10.10). Pr■ti, with love. When you work, when you
work for K■■■a with love and enthusiasm, that is your K■■■a conscious life. If you think that "It is
hackneyed, it is troublesome, but what can I do? These people ask me to do it. I have to do it," that is
not K■■■a consciousness. You have to do it voluntarily and with great pleasure. Then you know.
You will find in our Upade■■m■ta. Always you should be enthusiastic, uts■h■t. Dhairy■t, with
patience. Tat-tat-karma-pravartan■t, ni■cay■t. Ni■cay■t means with confidence. "When I am
engaged in K■■■a's business, K■■■a's activities, K■■■a will surely take me back to home, back to .
. ." Ni■cay■t. And K■■■a says, man-man■ bhava mad-bhakto mad-y■j■ m■■ namaskuru (BG
18.65): "I will take you back." It is stated. K■■■a is not a liar.
So we have to work with enthusiasm. Just . . . not vipar■t■ni. That will be accepted by Arjuna at the
end. K■■■a will ask him, "My dear Arjuna, what is your now decision?" Arjuna will say: "Yes." Tvat
pras■d■t ke■ava na■■a-moha■: "My all illusion is now gone by Your mercy." Kari■ye vacana■ tava
(BG 18.73): "Now I shall fight. Yes, I shall kill all my kinsmen."
That's all. Thank you very much. Hare K■■■a.
Devotees: Jaya ■r■la Prabhup■da. (end)
