Pradyumna: O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. (Prabhup■da and
devotees repeat) (leads chanting of verse)
(break)
arjuna■—Arjuna; uv■ca—said; senayo■—of the armies; ubhayo■—of both the parties; madhye—in
between them; ratham—the chariot; sth■paya—please keep; me—my; acyuta—O infallible one;
y■vat—as long as; et■n—all these; nir■k■e—may look; aham—I; yoddhu-k■m■n—desiring to fight;
avasthit■n—arrayed on the battlefield; kai■—with whom; may■—by me; saha—with; yoddhavyam—to
fight with; asmin—in this; ra■a—strife; samudyame—in the attempt.
Translation: "Arjuna said: O infallible one, please draw my chariot between the two armies so that I may
see who is present here, who is desirous of fighting, and with whom I must contend in this great battle
attempt."
Prabhup■da: Hm. Senayor ubhayor madhye ratha■ sth■paya me acyuta (BG 1.21). Before this,
K■■■a was addressed as H■■■ke■a. H■■■ke■a we have explained. Now K■■■a is addressed
here Acyuta. Cyuta means fallen, and acyuta means not fallen. Just like we are fallen. We are fallen
conditioned souls. In this material world we have come with a enjoying spirit. Therefore we are fallen. If
one keeps his position rightly, he does not fall. Otherwise he is degraded. That is fallen condition.
So all the living entities within this material world, beginning from Brahm■ down to the small,
insignificant ant, they are all fallen, fallen conditioned souls. Why they are fallen?
Fallen means when the living entities are under the clutches of this material energy. That is called
fallen. Just like a man, when he is under police custody, it is to be understood that he is a criminal, he is
fallen. He has fallen down from good citizenship. Similarly, we are all parts and parcels of K■■■a.
Mamaiv■■■o j■va-bhuta (BG 15.7). So as part and parcel, our position is to live with K■■■a. Just like
this is my finger, part and parcel of my body. The finger must remain attached with this body. When this
finger is cut off and fallen, although it is finger, it is no longer as important as it was formerly, when it
was attached with this body. So anyone who is not attached with the service of the Supreme Lord, he is
fallen. This is the conclusion.
But K■■■a is not fallen. If K■■■a . . . because He comes to reclaim us.
K■■■a says that, "I appear when there is discrepancies in the," I mean to say "occupational duties of
the living entities." dharmasya gl■nir bhavati. We don't translate dharma as "religion." Religion in the
English dictionary, it is "a kind of faith." Faith can be changed. But dharma is a word which cannot be
changed. If it is changed, it is to be understood artificial. Just like the water. Water is liquid, everyone
knows. But sometimes water becomes hard, very hard, ice. So that is not the natural position of water.
Artificially, on account of excessive cold or by artificial means, the water becomes solid. But the real
position of water is liquidity.
So when we are detached from the service of the Lord, this is also unnatural. Unnatural. Natural
position is that we must be engaged in the service of the Lord. That is our natural position. Therefore
the Vai■■ava kavi says that k■■■a bhuliya j■va bhoga vañcha kare. When a living entity forgets
K■■■a, forgets K■■■a's position . . . K■■■a's position . . . K■■■a says, bhokt■ra■ yajña-tapas■■
sarva-loka-mahe■varam (BG 5.29): "I am the proprietor. I am the enjoyer." This is the K■■■a's
position. He never falls down that position. K■■■a is enjoyer. He keeps always that position. He never
falls down. He never comes to the position of being enjoyed.
That is not possible. If you want to bring K■■■a on the position of being enjoyed, then you are
defeated. Being enjoyed means, keeping K■■■a in front, I want to get some profit of sense
gratification. That is our unnatural position. K■■■a will never agree. K■■■a will never agree. K■■■a
cannot be enjoyed. He is always enjoyer. He is always the proprietor. So k■■■a bhuliya j■va means
when we forget this position of K■■■a, that He is the supreme enjoyer, He is the supreme proprietor . .
. this is called forgetfulness. As soon as I think that, "I am enjoyer, I am proprietor," this is my fallen
stage. K■■■a bhuliya j■va bhoga vañcha kare. When we . . . then j■pa■iy■ dhare, m■y■,
immediately m■y■ captures.
Therefore a conditioned soul, fallen conditioned soul, is struggling for existence. He is trying to be
enjoyer; he is trying to be proprietor. That is his artificial way of life. Just like if a woman wants to
become a man, that is her artificial position. She may dress herself as a man, just like in the Western
countries sometimes we see woman is artificially dressing like man, with hat, coat, man, riding on
horse. That is artificial. So similarly, our position here in this material world is artificial. We are trying to
imitate a man.
Actually, the living entities are described in the Bhagavad-g■t■, prak■ti. Prak■ti means woman. And
puru■a means man. So the living entities are never described as puru■a. Puru■a is K■■■a. Puru■a
■■■vata. When Arjuna said, para■ brahma para■ dh■ma pavitra■ parama■ bhav■n, puru■a■
■■■vatam adyam . . . (BG 10.12). Puru■a■ ■■■vatam. K■■■a is always puru■a. God cannot be
female. God is always male, puru■a. And we are prak■ti. That is described in the Bhagavad-g■t■.
Apareyam itas tu viddhi me prak■tim par■ (BG 7.5).
After describing the material energy, bh■mir ■po analo v■yu■ (BG 7.4), earth, water, air, fire, this
material . . . this is also female, prak■ti. Female means . . . we have got . . . in India we have got little
experience: the female is always controlled. Female is never given the position of controller. Nowadays
it is going on. Just like Indira Gandhi, she has given the position of controller. This is artificial. In the
history of India, greater India, Mah■bh■rata, you will never find that a woman has been given the
position of controller. No. It is not possible.
We have to take things from the ■■stra. In the Bhagavad-g■t■ also, woman's position has been
equated with ■■dra. Striya■ ■■dr■s tath■ vai■yas te 'pi y■nti par■■ gatim (BG 9.32). So position
must be ascertained. But this position is artificial. Here, either woman or man, they are in artificial
position. Because a woman may be in woman's dress, but her mind is like man. She also wants to
enjoy. And the others, the so-called man . . .
The so-called man is also not man; he is woman. Prak■ti. Apareyam itas tu viddhi me prak■ti■ par■
(BG 7.5). Prak■ti. As the earth, water, air, fire, sky, they are also controlled—the supreme controller is
K■■■a—similarly, the so-called man or woman in this material world, they are also controlled. Nobody
can say that, "I am not controlled" who is here. You must be controlled.
Therefore we see two prak■tis, para prak■ti and apara prak■ti. But all of them are controlled; none of
them are the controller. And that is the difference between puru■a and prak■ti. Puru■a means
controller, and prak■ti means controlled. Puru■a means predominator, and prak■ti means
predominated. This is the difference. So K■■■a does not fall from His position of predominator.
Therefore He is addressed as Acyuta, Acyuta. Senayor ubhayor madhye ratha■ sth■paya me acyuta
(BG 1.21).
Another meaning of Acyuta . . . K■■■a is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and Arjuna knows
that, "I am not controller; I am controlled." He is devotee, he knows his position. Therefore he is now
trying to control K■■■a. He is ordering K■■■a. Senayor ubhayor madhye ratha■ sth■paya: "My dear
K■■■a"—he is not addressing as K■■■a; Acyuta—"now You place my chariot between the two
parties." This is ordering. That means Arjuna becoming controller and K■■■a becoming controlled.
Just the opposite. Therefore Arjuna knows his subordinate position, and he is ordering to K■■■a.
So indirectly he is begging to be excused: "My dear K■■■a, I cannot order You. Order must come from
You. But because You promised to carry out my order—You wanted to become my chariot
driver—therefore I am ordering. Therefore I am ordering. I am not in position of ordering to You, and
You promised to carry out my order, and I think You are fixed up in Your that promise. Therefore I am
asking You, Acyuta. You don't fall from Your promise." This is the . . . senayor ubhayor madhye ratha■
sth■paya me acyuta (BG 1.21). What is the number of verse?
Devotee: Page forty-eight.
Prabhup■da: Forty-eight? The next point is that Arjuna wanted to see with whom he had to fight. He
had no desire to fight. That will be explained. He was fighting unwillingly. Unwillingly. Because he is a
Vai■■ava, unnecessarily he does not want to kill, although he is k■atriya; it is his duty. Whenever
there is discrepancy, killing, as representative of K■■■a . . . K■■■a has got two business:
paritr■■■ya s■dh■n■■ vin■■■ya ca du■k■tam (BG 4.8). He has got two businesses. One business
is to give protection to the devotees, s■dhu, s■dhu. S■dhu means devotee. S■dhu does not mean
simply by changing dress, saffron color, and smoking b■■■. That is not s■dhu. S■dhu means
devotee.
One who is devotee . . . that is explained in many ■■stras. Sadhava■ s■dhu-bh■■a■■m.
S■dhu-bh■■a■■m.
This is the qualification of s■dhu. S■dhu is titik■ava, tolerates all kinds of miserable condition. He is
s■dhu. Because this is a place of miserable condition. A s■dhu learns how to tolerate. S■dhu is never
disturbed. Yasmin sthite guru■■pi du■khena na vic■lyate (BG 6.21). A s■dhu who has got the shelter
of K■■■a, if he is placed in the severest type of dangerous condition, he is never disturbed. Just like
Prahl■da Mah■r■ja: his father was putting him in so many dangerous condition, even he was
supplying with poison.
He knew that, "My father has given me poison to drink. All right, let me drink. If K■■■a likes, He will
save me. I am now put into such dangerous position, I have to drink. Father is giving poison. Who can
check?" And such a big, powerful Hira■yaka■ipu. The mother cried, requested . . . he forced the
mother, Prahl■da's mother, "Give your son this poison." So she begged so much, but he was a rascal
demon. "No, you must give."
So the mother knew, the son knew that the rascal father is giving this poison. What can he do, a small
child? "All right, let me drink." Guru■■pi du■khena na vic■lyate (BG 6.22). He is not agitating. "All
right. If K■■■a likes, I will like." This is the position of s■dhu. He is not disturbed. Titik■ava■. In all
circumstances he is tolerant. That is s■dhu. S■dhu does not become disturbed. Titik■ava■. At the
same time, k■ru■ik■■. He is himself disturbed, but he is merciful to others.
Just like Jesus Christ. He is being crucified, and still he is merciful: "God, these people do not know
what they are doing. Please excuse them." This is s■dhu. He is personally being disturbed by the
demons, but still, he is merciful to the general people. They are suffering for want of K■■■a
consciousness. So even up to the point of death, he is trying to preach K■■■a consciousness. "Let the
people be benefited. Eh, what is this material body? Even if I am killed, I am not killed. This body is
killed, that's all." This is s■dhu. Titik■ava■ k■ru■ik■■. In one side he is tolerant, and other side,
merciful.
The material world, when one man is disturbed, he cannot do any beneficial work to any others. He is
disturbed. "No, I am very much disturbed. Don't talk with me." No. But s■dhu still goes on benefiting the
people in general. Titik■ava■ k■ru■ik■■ (SB 3.25.21). And what kind of benefit? The so-called
rascals' humanitarian work? No. Suh■da■ sarva-bh■t■n■m (BG 5.29). He is beneficial to all kinds of
living entities.
Not this rascaldom, daridra-n■r■ya■a. Just like one rascal has manufactured this daridra-n■r■ya■a.
The poor man has become N■r■ya■a, and the goat N■r■ya■a is killed for their feeding. Not this kind
of s■dhu. Suh■da■ sarva-bh■t■n■m. A s■dhu will not allow any kind of killing. See in the Christian
religion, it is first injunction is, "Thou shall not kill." If you want to become religious . . . they are simply
killing, and still, they are claiming "Christian." What kind of Christian? Simply their business is killing. So
it is very difficult to find out a Christian, although they are claiming, "I am Christian." It is very difficult.
Because their business is killing. And Lord Jesus Christ ordered, first order is, "Thou shall not kill. Thou
shall not covet." Who is following?
So s■dhu is suh■da■ sarva-bh■t■n■m. Why he should allow animal killing? They are also living
entities, but for their benefit, the so-called s■dhu says, "The animal has no soul." What is this
nonsense? Animal has no soul? Why? Why animal has . . . what is the difference between animal and
man? What are the symptoms of possessing the soul? They are all equal. The man also eats, the
animal also eats. The man also sleeps, the animal also sleeps. The man also have sex life, the animals
also have sex life. The man also defends, the animals also defends. So where is the deficiency that you
say that the animal has no soul? Imperfect knowledge. Or making adjustment for their own benefit.
Now they are making correction, "Thou shall not kill"—"Thou shall not murder." That means it will come
to human being. But the actual commandment is "Thou shall not kill." But these Christian people, they
are making some amendment: "Thou shall not murder." Because murder will apply to the killing of
human beings. But Lord Jesus Christ never said like that, "Thou shall not kill." It is applicable both for
human being and for animal or even for trees. Unnecessarily you cannot kill. That is s■dhu. Suh■da■
sarva-bh■t■n■m (BG 5.29). "Don't kill my brother, but you can kill my neighbors"—not like that. He is
not s■dhu. S■dhu is kind to all living entities.
K■■■a consciousness means to become kind to everyone. Therefore we say, "No meat-eating."
Meat-eating means killing the animals. Killing the animals. Why you shall kill animals? You have to take
k■■■a-pras■dam. Patra■ pu■pa■ phala■ toya■ yo me bhakty■ prayacchati, tad aham a■n■mi (BG
9.26). K■■■a says . . . K■■■a is God. He can eat everything. Everything. K■■■a ate fire, you know.
There was forest fire in V■nd■vana. All the cowherds boys, they became very much frightened,
"K■■■a," "Yes, I'm ready." He ate up all the fire. So for K■■■a He could eat anything He likes. He is
God. But still, He recommends, patra■ pu■pa■ phala■ toya■ yo me bhakty■ prayacchati. Why?
Because we have to take K■■■a's pras■dam, so therefore He is recommending, "These things you
can give Me," patra■ pu■pa■ phala■ toya■. So that is our food. We are devotees of K■■■a. We are
meant for eating the remnants of foodstuff offered to K■■■a. That is our . . .
Jihv■, t■ra madhye . . . if you want to conquer the tongue, then you fix up your mind that you shall not
take anything which is not offered to K■■■a. Then your tongue will be controlled. T■ra madhye jihv■
ati lobhamaya sudurmati. Tongue is the bitterest enemy of the living being. The tongue is dragging.
Jihv■. "Kindly give me this immediately. Kindly give me this wine immediately. Kindly give me this tea
immediately. Kindly give me this cigarette immediately. Kindly give me this meat." Why? Control.
K■■■a says, patra■ pu■pa■ phala■ toya■ (BG 9.26). So we have to take pras■dam, eat K■■■a
pras■dam. Then naturally the other things will be negativated. This is the position. Suh■da■
sarva-bh■t■n■m (BG 5.29).
So if all human being becomes vegetarian—not vegetarian, but eater of the K■■■a's pras■dam—all
these liquor house and slaughterhouse and brothels will be closed. This is K■■■a consciousness
movement. We want to close these nonsense places of sinful life—brothels, illegitimate sense
gratification, sex relationship, prostitution. If we are embarrassed with this sinful life, there is no
possibility of becoming again acyuta. We remain cyuta, fallen. We remain fallen.
It is not so easy thing that, "I do everything, whatever I like." Some rascals preach that "Oh, religion has
nothing to do with your eating. You can eat anything you like, and still you become a religious man."
This is all nonsense. Nobody can become religious man if he is attracted by sinful activities. It is not
possible. You must stop sinful activities. That is first condition. Otherwise you cannot understand what
the . . . people . . . perhaps, in this K■■■a conscious . . . except this K■■■a conscious movement, all
the rascals, they do not know what is God. They have no clear conception of God, because they are
sinful. We can give the name, address and everything of God, clear conception, not vague idea, "God
may be like this. God may be like that." Why maybe? Here is God:
Clear conception. The ■■stra, Brahma-sa■hit■, clear description of God: ve■u■ kva■antam. He is
playing on flute. It is not that the Mural■dhara, ■y■masundara, K■■■a, has been imagined by some
poet. No. It is described in the ■■stra, the form of the Lord. He is busy in playing flute, ve■u■
kva■antam. Aravinda dal■yat■k■a■, His eyes are just like petals of the lotus flower. Ve■u■
kva■antam aravinda . . . barh■vata■sa, there is a peacock feather on His head.
Kandarpa-ko■i-kaman■ya-vi■e■a-■obha■, and He is so beautiful that His beauty can cut down
thousands of Cupids. Cupid is supposed to be the most beautiful in this material world.
Kandarpa-koti-kaman■ya-vi■e■a-■obha■ govindam ■di-puru■a■ tam aha■ bhaj■mi (Bs. 5.30).
Clear conception. This is the description of God in the ■■stra.
And when God came, K■■■a came on this planet, the same description: He is playing on flute, He has
got the feather, peacock feather. So this painting of K■■■a is not an artist's imagination. It is exactly
the form. So here is the form of the Lord. Here is the name of the Lord. Here is the activities of the Lord.
This is clear conception. A s■dhu knows what is God. Or s■dhu cannot know. They are thinking, "God
must be like this. God must . . . may be like this. He must be a very old man," because adi-puru■a. He
is the first living . . . in this way . . . so you cannot create God by imagination. That is not possible. God
is God, always. You have to know simply what is God. He is never cyuta.
God never becomes fallen down from His original position. The original position is, God describes
Himself, matta■ paratara■ n■nyat (BG 7.7): "There is no more superior authority than Me." That is
God. One, if he is controlled, how he can be God? The supreme controller is God; the supreme
controller is K■■■a. ■■vara■ parama■ k■■■a■ (Bs. 5.1). ■■vara■ means controller, and parama■
means supreme. And who is that? K■■■a. K■■■a says also, matta■ paratara■ n■nyat kiñcid asti
dhanañjaya (BG 7.7). So He is acyuta. He keeps His position. He never falls down. We are all fallen
souls. Because our position, our acyuta position is to serve K■■■a. Because we are part and parcel of
K■■■a.
The same example: Just like this finger is part and parcel of my body. Its business is to serve the body.
That is the business. There is no other business. A finger can pick up a rasagull■ and keep it here. The
finger cannot eat. Similarly, we cannot eat directly. That is our diseased condition. We have to offer
K■■■a. When K■■■a eats, if we eat that, then we become energized. Just like you rasagull■ put into
the mouth. When it goes to the stomach, the finger immediately becomes reddish. The finger enjoys.
Not only the finger; the eyes enjoy, the leg enjoys, because the energy is distributed. Directly we cannot
be energized by eating. We must eat K■■■a's pras■dam. This is principle. J■vera svar■pa haya nitya
k■■■a d■sa (CC Madhya 20.108-109).
So if we serve K■■■a, that is our acyuta position. If we deny to serve K■■■a, that is vicyuta, fallen
condition. Acyuta and vicyuta. So to become K■■■a conscious means acyuta-gotra. Acyuta-gotra.
Gotra—perhaps you do not know—gotra is the family tradition. According to Vedic civilization,
everybody has got gotra. Gotra means of the same family, of ■■is, gotra, from the ■■is. So we have to
become acyuta-gotra, again belonging to the family of K■■■a. Now we are fallen. Therefore we have
forgotten that we belong to the family of K■■■a. When we revive our consciousness, K■■■a
consciousness that, "I belong to the K■■■a's family . . ."
K■■■a is not alone. Eko bahu ■y■ma. He wants to enjoy. So we are family members of K■■■a, not
void. That is another rascaldom. Why K■■■a should be alone? He is so powerful, He is so opulent,
have you got any experience that a powerful person, opulent person, is alone? Where is that example?
Any rich man, any powerful man, any king, any lord, oh, he has got so many associates. So how
K■■■a can be alone? K■■■a is never alone. Therefore you will find always K■■■a with the gop■s,
K■■■a with the cowherds boy, K■■■a with Arjuna. K■■■a is never alone.
So these are the condition of becoming acyuta. So Arjuna knows all these things because he is a
devotee. Therefore particularly he is addressing K■■■a, senayor ubhayor madhye ratha■ sth■paya
me acyuta (BG 1.21).
That's all right. Thank you very much.
Devotees: Jaya. All glories to ■r■la Prabhup■da. (end)
