Pradyumna: O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo
bhagavate v■sudev■ya. (devotees repeat) (leads chanting of verse)
Prabhup■da: . . . (indistinct)
(break)
p■pam—vices; eva—certainly; ■■rayet—must take upon; asm■n—us; hatv■—by killing; et■n—all
these; ■tat■yina■—aggressors; tasm■t—therefore; na—never; arh■■—deserving; vayam—us;
hantum—to kill; dh■rtar■■■r■n—the sons of Dh■tar■■■ra; svab■ndhav■n—along with friends;
svajanam—kinsmen; hi—certainly; katham—how; hatv■—by killing; sukhina■—happy;
sy■ma—become; m■dhava—O K■■■a, husband of the goddess of fortune.
Translation: "Sin will overcome us if we slay such aggressors. Therefore it is not proper for us to kill the
sons of Dh■tar■■■ra and our friends. What should we gain, O K■■■a, husband of the goddess of
fortune, and how could we be happy by killing our own kinsmen?"
Prabhup■da: So, p■pam evam. P■pam means sinful activities, and pu■yam is pious. So people
should consider, in every activity, whether it is p■pam or pu■yam, whether it is virtuous or sinful
activities. But the asuras, they do not know. Prav■tti■ ca niv■tti■ ca na vidur asur■ jan■■ (BG 16.7).
Those who are asuras, they do not care what is sinful or what is right. "I like it; I must do it." This is
asura. There is no reference to the authorities, whether the action which I am going to do, whether it is
pious or impious.
Because by impious activities I will be degraded. Adho gacchanti tamasa■ (BG 14.18).
Jaghanya-gu■a-v■tti-sth■■. If we become addicted to sinful activities, the result will be we shall be
degraded. But they do not know. Even so-called religious priest, they support killing, astonished. Killing
is impious, sinful activity, but in the name of religion, killing is also going on. If someone says, "It is my
religion to cut throat," will it be accepted very nice thing? Sometimes . . . just like here is the war. This is
also religious war. But still, discrimination. Arjuna, because he is a Vai■■ava, a Vai■■ava means
devat■, demigod. Vi■■u-bhakto bhaved daiva ■suras tad viparyaya■ (BG 16.6). What is the
difference between deva and asura? Who is called a devata, and who is called a asura? There are two
kinds of men. One class is called deva, devata. The other class is called asura. Dev■sura.
So there is always fight between deva and asura. Now, at the present moment, the number of asuras
have increased. Formerly the number of devat■s were greater. So Arjuna is devat■ because he is
vi■■u-bhakta. Dvau bh■ta-sargau loke daiva ■sura eva ca (BG 16.6). There are two classes of men
within this creation. Vi■■u-bhakto bhaved daiva■. Those who are devotees of Lord Vi■■u, they are
called devat■, just like the demigods like Indra, Candra, S■rya and many others. There are thirty-three
crores of devat■s in the higher planetary system. They are all vi■■u-bhakta. They will abide by the
orders of Vi■■u and Vai■■ava. Just like Indra: he is devat■.
There was fight between Hira■yaka■ipu and the Indra's party. So when Hira■yaka■ipu was defeated,
naturally the . . . afterward, if the other party is defeated, the victorious party makes some . . . so many
aggression, especially aggression of women. That is still current. Innocent women, they are very much
harassed after the war by the victorious party. You know, the soldiers are given freedom to rape the
women and plunder the property. So many things they have. So when Hira■yaka■ipu was defeated, all
the devat■s, they did not make such aggression, but the wife of Hira■yaka■ipu—K■yadhu, I
think—she was arrested by Indra and was taken. She was crying, just usual, woman. But she was
being dragged by Indra.
So N■rada was passing. Now, he said: "What are you doing this?" "No, there is no question of
harassing this woman. But I am taking her in my custody because she is pregnant, and the child is
begotten by asura, Hira■yaka■ipu. Therefore I shall wait for the birth of the child, and as soon as she
gives birth, I will kill that child." Yes. So N■rada said: "No, no. That child is not asura child. He is
coming, a great devotee, mah■-bh■gavata, of K■■■a." Because N■rada knew that when . . . not
before. After all, he knew. But before also, he knew. Because they are saintly person, they can
understand that "Here is a child is coming who will be a great devotee of K■■■a." So
mah■-bh■gavata. So "Don't try that. You don't take her to your custody. Better give her in my custody.
I shall take care."
So immediately he abided by the order of N■rada. Immediately. He released. And not only released,
circumambulated the woman: "Oh, here is a mah■-bh■gavata in the womb of this woman. So let us
offer our obeisances." This is Vai■■ava. As soon as understood that "There is a Vai■■ava
mah■-bh■gavata in the womb of this woman. She is to be respected, offered obeisances." This is
called Vai■■ava. But the asura would not do that. Asura would not do that. That is the difference
between devat■ and asura.
In the Bhagavad-g■t■, Sixteenth Chapter, you will find the description of the asura: prav■tti■ ca
niv■tti■ ca na vidur asur■ jan■■ (BG 16.7). Prav■tti. Prav■tti means what sort of activities we shall
do and what sort of activities we shall not do. The asuras, they do not know. The asuras, they do not
know. Anything they do. "For my sense gratification I must do everything." Therefore they become
entangled. So long they are strong in this life, they do not take care of anyone, ■■stra, s■dhu or guru.
They do not care for anything. So that means . . . but the asuric civilization, the living entities become
entangled because he may not care for any action, the asura, but the nature is there.
Rascals, they are thinking that they are free to act anything he likes. That is not possible. So long we
are in this material world, we are conditioned. Prak■te■ kriyam■■■ni gu■ai■ karm■■i. As we are
associating with the particular quality of this material nature . . .
There are three varieties of quality: goodness, passion and ignorance. So we have to associate with
either of these qualities—unless we are K■■■a conscious. Unless one is engaged in devotional
service, he must be influenced by these three kinds of qualities. Goodness . . . somebody may be very
good man, according to the estimation of the . . . just like Arjuna, he is talking in the modes of
goodness, considering, considering. "Although they are ■tat■yina■ . . ." P■pam eva ■■rayed asm■n
hatv■ et■n ■tat■yina■. ■tat■yina■ means aggressor. According to law, if somebody comes to attack
you, or if somebody comes to kidnap your wife, these are ■tat■yina■. Or somebody comes to set fire
in your house, especially they are called aggressors. So these aggressors are to be immediately killed.
There is no question of nonviolence. You must kill immediately. There is no sin. ■tat■yina■.
But here, although the other party is ■tat■yina■, aggressor, still, Arjuna is considering whether they
should be killed or not. That is the difference between devat■. In every action, they are calculating. But
he is considering that, "This kind of aggressor, because they are my kinsmen, they are my family men,
whether this kind of aggressor should be killed or not?" It is common sense. Suppose your son has
done something mischievous. The same thing. Same thing means to attack the father. Still, the father
will consider, "Whether I shall kill my son or not?" That is natural. "If my son sets fire in the house,
whether I shall kill him or not?"
So Arjuna's position is like that, "Although they are ■tat■yina■, aggressor, still, because they belong to
the same family, whether I shall kill?" He is considering, p■pam eva ■■rayed: "If I kill this kind of
aggressor, I will be attacked with sinful activities. I have to suffer the result of sinful activities." And he is
explaining why. P■pam eva ■■rayed asm■n. "Because these are b■ndhav■n." Sva-b■ndhav■n
dh■rtar■■■r■n. The dh■rtar■■■r■n means the sons of Dh■tar■■■ra—Duryodhana and others. So
sva-b■ndhav■n: "They are our family members, b■ndhav■n." Sva-jana■ hi katha■ hatv■ sukhina■
sy■ma m■dhava. "M■dhava, my dear M■dhava, You are the husband of the goddess of fortune. So
You are always very happy. Do You think I shall become happy by killing my own men? Do You think
like that?" Because friend and friend talking.
So this is the position. Just see: they were ■tat■yina■, aggressor. There is no doubt about it. Because
these dh■rtar■■■r■n, the sons of Dh■tar■■■ra, they insulted Draupadi, Arjuna's wife. There was
betting. The wife was the betting. So they defeated, they were defeated in the chess play, and the wife
was taken by the other party. So Kar■a took the opportunity. Because during Draupadi's svaya■vara,
Kar■a was insulted by Draupadi. The piercing of the eyes of the fish, Kar■a was greater, what is
called, arrowman. So when Kar■a came to touch the arrow for piercing the eyes of the fish, Draupadi
objected, objected because she wanted Arjuna to become her husband. But she knew that, "If Kar■a
comes to this combat, he will be victorious. Then I will have to go to Kar■a."
So she was also very intelligent daughter of k■atriya king. So Karna, nobody knew that he is k■atriya.
He was supposed to be son of a carpenter. Kar■a was born before Kunt■'s marriage. Therefore she . .
. Kar■a remained hidden, whose son. But he was k■atriya. So it was unknown. So Draupadi took this
opportunity that, "This competition is meant for the k■atriyas, not for the non-k■atriyas." Because he
was supposed to be son of a carpenter, ■■dra. So he was not given the opportunity to gain Draupadi.
But if he was given the opportunity, he would have come out victorious.
So now Kar■a took this opportunity. When Draupadi was lost in the game, so he immediately . . .
Kar■a was Duryodhana's friend. He immediately advised, "Now she is our property. We can do
whatever we like with. Arjuna has lost his wife." So he advised that "Make her naked in this assembly."
To become naked in the . . . so many people, that is a great insult for a woman. So actually, they tried
to insult. Not tried; it was fact. But K■■■a saved. You know, Draupadi's vastra-hara■a. She was tried
to become naked, but these people could not make her naked. The s■r■ was supplied by K■■■a, one
after another, one after another, heaps of s■r■. Then they become fed up, gave up that business that,
"She cannot be made naked."
So they were actually ■tat■yina■. Because ■tat■yina■ means one who comes to kidnap your wife,
insults your wife, you should immediately kill him. Just like Lord R■macandra. He was so pious king,
but when it so happened that His wife, S■t■, was insulted . . . S■t■ was taken away by R■va■a. Lord
R■macandra could marry hundreds and thousands of S■t■s. He is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. He could create S■t■, R■dh■r■■■, Lak■m■.
They are the pleasure potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead cannot have a material wife or a material companion. K■■■a's R■dh■r■■■ or Lord
R■macandra's S■t■dev■, N■r■ya■a's Lak■m■dev■, they are pleasure potency of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. R■dh■ k■■■a-pra■aya-vik■tir hl■din■ ■aktir asm■t (CC Adi 1.5).
■hl■din■-■akti. K■■■a, God, has got many potencies. One of the potencies is called
■hl■din■-■akti, pleasure potency. So K■■■a's consort, Lord R■macandra's consort, they are
pleasure potency, exhibited.
So to show the example, Lord R■macandra, because S■t■ was kidnapped, S■t■ was insulted, or
R■macandra was insulted, the retaliation was Lord R■macandra killed not only R■va■a but the whole
dynasty, finished. Only for one woman. He could create so many. No. Because ■tat■yina■, aggressed
over. Just to teach people that anyone, if he is aggressor, he must be killed. This is the position.
But Arjuna is considering whether it will be pious or impious. This is devat■. In every action they will
consider, "What I am going to do, whether it is pious or impious." That is devat■, "If it is pious, then it
will elevate me. And if it is impious, then it will degrade me." Nobody wants degradation. The human life
should be especially meant for elevation, not for degradation. You have come to this human form of life
from the lower status of life. Jalaj■ nava-lak■■■i sthavar■ lak■a-vi■■ati k■mayo rudra-sa■khyak■■
(Padma Pur■■a).
Through so many status of life: the aquatics, the trees, the plants, the insects, the reptiles, the birds, the
beasts. In this way . . . bah■n■■ janman■m ante. Bah■n■■ sambhavante (BG 7.19). This human
form of life is gotten, we have received, after many, many births. These people, they do not know. It is
very rare.
Therefore Narottama d■sa ■h■kura sings, manu■ya janama p■iya, r■dh■-k■■■a n■ bhajiy■,
j■niy■ suniy■ vi■a kh■inu (Hari hari viphale). Hari hari viphale janama goi■u. He is lamenting, "My
dear K■■■a, I am so unfortunate. I got this human form of life. It was meant for developing K■■■a
consciousness. But I have wasted my time otherwise. So how it is so?" J■niy■ suniy■ vi■a kh■inu,
"Knowingly I have taken poison. Knowingly." Labdhv■ sudurlabha■ idam bahu-sambhavante,
manu■yam artha-dam (SB 11.9.29).
Manu■yam . . . these people, they do not know. Because they are asuras, they do not know what to do
in this human form of life and what not to do. They are killing animals without any hesitation. They do
not know, these rascals. And still they are spiritual leaders. How horrible condition is this, in this
Kali-yuga, just imagine. Without any restriction, without any hindrance, they are committing sinful life.
They do not know, next life, all this boastfulness, pride, will be finished. He will have to accept another
body, which will be offered by the material nature. You cannot say that, "I will not accept this body; I
want this body." No. Nature is not under your dictation. You have to abide by the dictation of nature.
Prak■te■ kriyam■■■ni. This verse of Bhagavad-g■t■ is very important.
Ah■■k■ra, by false ego. The asuras, they think, "I am independent. I can do whatever I like." No. You
cannot do so. If you do so, then you will be punished.
For every little action, you are responsible. It is being noted by the material nature. And you will have to
. . . you will be forced to accept a kind of body for suffering. There are so many types of body.
Therefore Arjuna, being devat■, he is considering that "Although they are ■tat■yina■, at the same
time, they are family men. Whether it is good to kill family?" He is asking K■■■a. K■■■a is there. He
is considering, he is consulting with K■■■a, that "Do You think that killing this kind of aggressor, I will
be benefited or not?" Therefore in the last line he said, sva-jana■ hi katha■ hatv■ sukhina■ sy■ma
m■dhava: "My dear K■■■a, do You think by killing my family men, my relatives, shall I be happy? You
are M■dhava. You are always happy because You are husband of goddess of fortune. But do You
think I shall be happy in this way?" This is consultation.
So this is the proof of Arjuna's character, a devotee's character. A devotee is always devat■, demigod.
So one who is devotee, one who is K■■■a conscious, sarvair gu■ais tatra sam■sate sur■■ (SB
5.18.12). Sura means devat■. All the good qualities of devat■. A devotee of K■■■a will never accept
that killing is very good. No.
"For the satisfaction of my tongue, I shall kill so many animals," a devotee will never accept. Ahi■■a.
Ahi■■a. That is the third quality. Am■nitvam adambhitva■ ahi■■■ k■■ntir ■rjavam (BG 13.8). These
are . . . everything is there in the Bh■gavatam. Am■nitvam. Am■nitvam means to accept this body as
"I am." This is am■nitvam, er, not to accept. That is am■nitvam. Everyone is proud that, "I am Indian,"
"I am American," "I am Englishman." So it is boastful, very proud of this body.
So knowledge means "I am not this body. I am not this body." That is am■nitvam. Adambhitvam. As
soon as we become aware that "I am not this body," then my false pride immediately goes. Am■nitvam
adambhitvam ahi■■■. Then ahi■■■, nonviolence—■rjavam, simplicity. There are eighteen
qualification of the demigods. So one who becomes a devotee of K■■■a, K■■■a conscious, these, all
these good qualities develop. So here is the proof, that Arjuna, because a devotee of K■■■a, he is
considering, "Whether I shall kill them or not?" Ahi■s■. It is consideration, not that it is final settlement.
So people are trying to elevate the status of the society by so many things. But they do not know the
secret. The secret is that if one is trained only to become a devotee of K■■■a, all good qualities
automatically will be visible in his person. There is no need of separate endeavor how to make a man
honest, how to make a man religious, how to make a man high-thinking, simple living. These are good .
. . ■amo damas titik■a ■rjava■ jñ■na■ vijñ■nam ■stikyam (BG 18.42). All these qualities
immediately develop. Because a living entity, spirit soul, he is part and parcel of K■■■a. Mamaiv■■■o
j■va■ (BG 15.7). K■■■a says all this. Aha■ b■ja-prada■ pit■ (BG 14.4). "They have come to this
material world. I am the seed-giving father. They wanted to enjoy, so I have given them chance. But
actually I am the father. The material nature is the mother."
Just like we have got experience, the father injects the living entity in the womb of the mother, and the
mother, by her blood, develops the body of the child. Similarly, all these living entities, 8,400,000
species, the . . . b■jo 'ha■ sarva-bh■t■n■m (BG 7.10). The father is K■■■a. He has given the seed
in the womb of this material nature. And the material nature has given the body. Somebody has got the
body of fish, somebody has got the body of tree, plant, somebody has got insect, reptile, somebody
bird, sometimes beasts, somebody human being, somebody demigod. But all these materials have
been supplied by the mother. It is very easy to understand. Just like the child grows, the mother
supplies the bodily ingredients.
Caitanya Mah■prabhu therefore . . . this is very scientific. When He took sanny■sa and the mother
came . . . Advaita Prabhu arranged to see for the last time her son. Because a sanny■s■ is no more
coming home. So at that time, mother became overwhelmed, "Such beautiful body. He has nice hair.
Now it is shaven." So she became very much overwhelmed and was crying. So Caitanya Mah■prabhu
immediately fell down on her lotus feet and He said: "My dear mother, this body is yours." "My dear
mother, this body is yours. This body should have been engaged for your service, but some way or
other, I mistake; I have taken this sanny■s■. Kindly excuse Me." Caitanya Mah■prabhu said that, that
"This body belongs to you. This is your body." Every son should think like that. This is Vedic culture.
Actually, the body supplies, mother. From the very beginning, after sex . . . these are all described in
the Bh■gavatam. The two secretions become emulsified, and a body is formed just like a pea and
gradually develops. The ingredients, the energy is supplied by the mother. So the same thing. The
whole creation, the body is supplied by material nature, mother. Therefore she is called "mother."
Material nature is called "mother," Mother Durg■. S■■■i-sthiti-pralaya-s■dhana-■aktir eka, the
material nature, and her name is Durg■.
This is description of Durg■. So K■■■a also says. So we should not think like that, that animals or
trees or birds and beast, they are other than ourself. They are our brothers, because the seed-giving
father is K■■■a, and the mother is material nature. So we have got the same father and same mother.
So if we have got the same father and mother, they are all our brothers.
So unless one is advanced in spiritual consciousness, how he can think of universal brotherhood? This
is nonsense. There is no possibility. The so-called universal brotherhood is possible when he is K■■■a
conscious, when one knows that K■■■a is the common father of everyone. The father will not tolerate.
Suppose father has got ten sons. Out of them, one or two sons are useless. So those who are very
capable sons, if they say to the father, "My dear father, these two sons of yours, they are useless, so let
us cut their throat and eat," so father will say, "Yes, you do that"? No. Father will never say. The father
will say: "Let them be useless, but let them live at my cost. Why . . .? You have no right to infringe on
their rights." This is common sense. But these rascals, they think that animals are to be killed for the
satisfaction of the tongue of the human being. No sense. No sense. And still they are passing on as
religious heads.
Such type of cheating religion is completely kicked out from this Bh■gavata religion. dharma■
projjhita-kaitavo atra paramo nirmatsar■■■■ v■stava■ vastu vedyam atra (SB 1.1.2). It is meant for . .
. this bh■gavat-dharma, K■■■a consciousness movement, is meant for the paramo
nirmatsar■■■■—those who are not envious. How they can be envious? Paramaha■sa, one who has
understood what is this creation, who is the creator, what are these living entities, one who has got this
knowledge, he is called paramaha■sa.
So how a paramaha■sa can be envious of others? Therefore it is said, paramo nirmatsar■■■m (SB
1.1.2). Matsarat■. Matsarat■ means envious. So without becoming Vai■■ava, without becoming a
devotee of K■■■a, you do not think that anyone is a human being. He is simply animal.
Thank you very much. Hare K■■■a.
Devotees: All glories to ■r■la Prab . . . (cut) (end)
