Pradyumna: Translation: "Sañjaya said: Having spoken thus, Arjuna, chastiser of enemies, told
K■■■a, 'Govinda, I shall not fight,' and fell silent." (BG 2.9)
Prabhup■da: In the previous verse, Arjuna said that, "There is no profit in this fighting, because the
other side, they are all my relatives, kinsmen, and by killing them, even if I become victorious, so what
is the value?" That we have explained, that such kind of renouncement sometimes takes place in
ignorance. Actually, it is not very much intelligently placed.
So in this way, evam uktv■, "saying this, 'So there is no profit in fighting,' " evam uktv■, "saying this,"
h■■■ke■am . . . He is speaking to the master of the senses. And in previous verse he has said,
■i■yas te 'ha■ prapannam (BG 2.7): "I am Your surrendered disciple." So K■■■a becomes guru, and
Arjuna becomes the disciple. Formerly they were talking as friends. But friendly talking cannot decide
any serious question. When there is some serious matter, it must be spoken between authorities.
So h■■■ke■am, I have several times explained. H■■■ka means the senses, and ■■a means the
master. H■■■ka-■■a, and they join together: H■■■ke■a. Similarly, Arjuna also: gu■■ka-■■a.
Gu■■ka means darkness, and ■■a. Darkness means ignorance.
Guru's duty is . . . a ■i■ya, a disciple, comes to the guru for enlightenment. Everyone is born foolish.
Everyone. Even the human being, because they are coming from the animal kingdom by evolution, so
the birth is the same, ignorance, like animal. Therefore, even though one is human being, he requires
education. The animal cannot take education, but a human being can take education.
Therefore ■■stra says, n■ya■ deho deha-bh■j■■ n■loke ka■■■n k■m■n arhate vid-bhuj■■ ye (SB
5.5.1). I have several times recited this verse, that now . . . in the lower than human being condition, we
have to work very hard simply for four necessities of life: eating, sleeping, mating and defending. Sense
gratification. Main object is sense gratification. Therefore everyone has to work very hard. But in the
human form of life, K■■■a gives us so much facilities, intelligence.
We can make our standard of living very comfortable, but with the purpose of attaining perfection in
K■■■a consciousness. You live comfortably—that's all right—but don't live like animals, simply
increasing sense gratification. The human effort is going on how to live comfortably, but they want to
live comfortably for sense gratification. That is the mistake of the modern civilization.
Yukt■h■ra-vih■ra■ ca yogo bhavati siddhi■ (BG 6.17). In the Bhagavad-g■t■ it is said yukt■h■ra.
Yes, you must eat, you must sleep, you must satisfy your senses, you must arrange for defense—as
much as possible; not to divert attention too much.
We have to eat, yukt■h■ra. That's a fact. But not aty■hara. R■pa Gosv■m■ has advised in his
Upade■■m■ta:
If you want to advance in spiritual consciousness—because that is the only objective of life—then you
should not eat more, aty■h■ra■, or collect more. Aty■h■ra■ pray■sa■ ca prajalpo niyamagraha■.
That is our philosophy.
The other day in Paris one press reporter came to me, the Socialist press. So I informed him that, "Our
philosophy is that everything belongs to God." K■■■a says—what is that?—bhokt■ra■
yajña-tapas■■ sarva-loka-mahe■varam (BG 5.29): "I am the enjoyer, bhokt■." Bhokt■ means
enjoyer. So bhokt■ra■ yajña-tapas■■. Just like this body is working. The whole body is working,
everyone's, to enjoy life, but wherefrom the enjoyment begins? The enjoyment begins from the
stomach. You have to give sufficient nice foodstuff to the stomach. If there is sufficient energy, we can
digest. If sufficient energy, then all other senses become strong. Then you can enjoy sense
gratification. Otherwise not possible. If you cannot digest . . . just like we are now old man. We cannot
digest. So there is no question of sense enjoyment.
So sense enjoyment begins from the stomach. The luxuriant growth of the tree begins from the root, if
there is sufficient water. Therefore the trees are called p■da-pa: they drink water from the legs, the
roots, not from the heads. Just like we eat from the head. So there are different arrangement. As we
can eat from the mouth, the trees, they eat from their legs. But one must eat.
■h■ra-nidr■-bhaya-maithuna. Eating is there, either you eat through your legs or your mouth or your
hands. But so far K■■■a is concerned, He can eat from anywhere. He can eat from hands, from legs,
from eyes, from ears—anywhere—because He is complete spiritual. There is no difference between
His heads and legs and ears and eyes. That is stated in the Brahma-sa■hit■:
So as in this body our sense enjoyment should begin from the stomach, similarly, as the tree begins
developing luxuriantly from the root, similarly, K■■■a is the origin of everything, janm■dy asya yata■
(SB 1.1.1), root. So without K■■■a consciousness, without pleasing K■■■a, you cannot be happy.
This is the system.
Therefore how K■■■a will be pleased? K■■■a will be pleased that . . . we are all K■■■a's sons,
God's sons. Everything K■■■a's property. These are fact. Now, we can enjoy taking pras■dam of
K■■■a, because He is the proprietor, bhokt■, enjoyer. So everything should be given first to K■■■a,
and then you take the pras■dam. That will make you happy. That is stated in the Bhagavad-g■t■.
Bhuñjate te agha■ p■pa■ ye pacanty ■tma-k■ra■■t (BG 3.13): "Those who are cooking for eating
themselves, they are simply eating sins." Bhuñjate te tv agha■ p■pa■ ye pacanty ■tma . . . yajñ■rth■t
karma■o 'nyatra loko' ya■ karma . . .
Everything should be done for K■■■a, even your eating. Anything. All sense enjoyment, you can
enjoy—but after K■■■a has enjoyed. Then you can eat. Therefore K■■■a's name is H■■■ke■a. He
is the master, master of the senses. You cannot enjoy your senses independently. Just like the servant.
Servant cannot enjoy. Just like the cook cooking very, very nice foodstuff in the kitchen, but he cannot
eat in the beginning. That is not possible. Then he will be dismissed. The master first of all must take,
and then they can enjoy all the nice foodstuff.
So K■■■a is the master of the senses. The whole world is struggling for sense gratification. Here is
the simple philosophy, truth, that "First of all let enjoy, let K■■■a enjoy. He is the master. Then we
enjoy." Tena tyaktena bhuñj■th■, the ■■opani■ad. Everything belongs to K■■■a. ■■■v■syam ida■
sarvam (ISO 1): "Everything belongs to K■■■a." This is the mistake. Everything belongs to K■■■a,
but we are thinking, "Everything belongs to me." This is illusion. Aha■ mameti. Aha■ mameti. Janasya
moho 'yam aha■ mameti (SB 5.5.8). This is illusion.
Everyone is thinking, "I am this body, and everything, whatever we find in this world, that is to be
enjoyed by me." This is the mistake of civilization. The knowledge is: "Everything belongs to God. I can
take only whatever He gives me, kindly allows." Tena tyaktena bhuñj■th■. This is not Vai■■ava
philosophy; this is the fact. Nobody is proprietor. ■■■v■syam ida■ sarvam. Every . . . K■■■a says: "I
am enjoyer. I am the proprietor." Sarva-loka-mahe■varam (BG 5.29). Mah■-■■varam. Mah■ means
great. We can claim ■■varam, controller, but K■■■a is described as mah■-■■varam, "controller of
the controller." That is K■■■a. Nobody is independently controller.
So therefore K■■■a is described H■■■ke■a. H■■■ke■a h■■■ke■a-sevana■ bhaktir ucyate (CC
Madhya 19.170). And bhakti means to serve H■■■ke■a by the h■■■ka. H■■■ka means senses.
K■■■a is the master of the senses, and therefore, whatever senses I have got, the master is K■■■a,
proprietor is K■■■a. So when our senses are engaged in the satisfaction of the master of the senses,
that is called bhakti. This is the definition of bhakti, devotional service. And when the senses are
engaged for sense gratification, not for the master, that is called k■ma. K■ma and prema. Prema
means to love K■■■a and do everything for satisfaction of K■■■a. That is prema, love.
And k■ma means everything done for the satisfaction of my senses. This is the difference. The sense
is the medium. Either you do it, satisfy your senses, or you satisfy K■■■a's senses. But when you
satisfy K■■■a's senses, you become perfect, and when you satisfy your senses, you become
imperfect, illusioned. Because you cannot satisfy your senses. That is not possible without K■■■a.
H■■■ke■a h■■■ke■a-sevana■ bhaktir ucyate (CC Madhya 19.170).
Therefore one has to purify the senses. At the present moment, everyone is trying to satisfy his senses.
Aha■ mameti. Janasya moho 'yam (SB 5.5.8). Pu■sa■ striy■ maithun■-bh■vam etat. The whole
material world is that . . . there are two living entities: male and female. The male is trying also, satisfy
his senses, and the female is also trying to satisfy her senses. Here the so-called love means . . . there
is no love. It cannot be love, because the man and woman . . . nobody is trying to satisfy the other
party's senses. Everyone is trying to satisfy his or her senses. A woman is loving a man for satisfying
her senses, and the man is loving a woman for satisfying . . .
Therefore, as soon as there is some little disturbance in the sense gratification—divorce. "I don't want
it." Because the central point is personal sense gratification. But we can make a picture, show-bottle,
"Oh, I love you so much. I love you so much." There is no love. It is all k■ma, lust. In the material world,
there cannot be possibility of love. It is not possible. The so-called cheating, cheating only. "I love you. I
love you because you are beautiful; it will satisfy my senses. Because you are young, it will satisfy my
senses." This is the world. Material world means this. Pu■sa■ striy■ maithun■-bh■vam etat. The
whole basic principle of this material world is sense gratification.
This material world, so-called love, society, friendship and love—everything is depending on that sense
gratification, maithun■di, beginning from sex. Yan maithun■di g■hamedhi-sukha■ hi tuccham. So
when one becomes free from this maithun■di-sukham, he is liberated. He is liberated, sv■m■,
gosv■m■. So long one is attached to this maithun■di, sex impulse, he is neither sv■m■ nor
gosv■m■. Sv■m■ means when one becomes master of the senses. As K■■■a is the master of
senses, so when one becomes K■■■a conscious, he becomes master of the senses. It is not that
senses should be stopped. No. It should be controlled. "When I require, I shall use it; otherwise not."
That is master of senses. "I shall not act impelled by the senses. Senses should act under my
direction." That is sv■m■.
Therefore Arjuna is called Gu■■ke■a. He is master of . . . he is also, when he likes. He is not a
coward, but he is compassionate, because he is devotee. Because he is devotee of K■■■a. Anyone
who becomes a devotee of K■■■a, all the good qualities manifest in his body. Yasy■sti bhaktir
bhagavaty akiñcan■ sarvair gu■ais tatra sam■sate sur■■ (SB 5.18.12). All godly qualities. So Arjuna,
he is also . . . otherwise, how he can become intimate friend of K■■■a unless of the same position?
Friendship becomes very strong when both the friends on equal level: same age, same education,
same prestige, same beauty. The more similarity of position, then the friendship is there, strong. So
Arjuna is also on the same level of K■■■a. Just like if somebody becomes friend of the president,
friend of the king or queen. So he is not ordinary man. He must be of the same position.
Just like the Gosv■m■s. The Gosv■m■s, when they gave up their family life . . . it is described by
■r■niv■sa ■c■rya, tyaktv■ t■r■am a■e■a-ma■■ala-pati-■re■i■ sad■ tucchavat (■r■ ■r■
■a■-gosv■my-a■■aka 4). Ma■■ala-pati, big, big leaders, ma■■ala-pati. Big, big leaders, zamindars,
big, big, big men. He was minister. Who can become his friend unless he is also a very big man? So
R■pa Gosv■m■ gave up their company. As soon as R■pa Gosv■m■ and San■tana Gosv■m■
became acquainted with ■r■ Caitanya Mah■prabhu, immediately they decided that, "We shall retire
from this ministership and join ■r■ Caitanya Mah■prabhu to help Him." To serve Him, not to help Him.
■r■ Caitanya Mah■prabhu doesn't require anyone's help. But if we try to associate and try to serve
Him, then our life becomes successful.
Just like K■■■a says . . . K■■■a came to preach Bhagavad-g■t■. Sarva-dharm■n parityajya m■m
eka■ ■ara■a■ vraja (BG 18.66). That was His mission that, "These rascals have become servant of
so many things: society, friendship, love, religion, this, that, so many things, nationality, community. So
these rascals should stop all this nonsense business." Sarva-dharm■n parityajya: "Give up all this
nonsense. Simply just become surrendered unto Me." This is religion. Otherwise, how K■■■a is
advising that sarva-dharm■n parityajya (BG 18.66): "You give up all religious system"? He
came—dharma-sa■sth■pan■rth■ya (BG 4.8) — He came to reestablish the principles of religion. Now
He says, sarva-dharm■n parityajya: "Give up all." That means anything without K■■■a
consciousness, without God consciousness, they are all cheating religion. They are not religion.
Religion means dharm■■ tu s■k■at bhagavat-pra■■tam (SB 6.3.19), the order of the Supreme Lord.
If we do not know who is the Supreme Lord, if we do not know what is the order of the Supreme Lord,
then where is religion? That is not religion. That may go on in the name of religion, but that is cheating.
So the Bhagavad-g■t■ ends: sarva-dharm■n parityajya m■m eka■ ■ara■a■ vraja (BG 18.66). And
Bh■gavata begins from that point.
Therefore Bhagavad-g■t■ is the preliminary study of ■r■mad-Bh■gavatam. Bh■gavata begins,
dharma■ projjhita-kaitava■ atra (SB 1.1.2): "Now, in this ■r■mad-Bh■gavatam, all cheating type of
religions are rejected, projjhita." So there is link. Real religion means to love God. That is real religion.
Therefore Bh■gavata says, sa vai pu■s■■ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhok■aje (SB 1.2.6): "That is
first-class religion." It doesn't mean that you follow this religion or that religion. You may follow any
religion, it doesn't matter, either Hindu religion or Christian religion or Muhammadan religion, anything
you like.
But we have to test. Just like a student who has passed M.A. examination. Nobody inquires, "From
which college you have passed your examination?" You have passed M.A. examination? That's all
right. And we are concerned, whether you are graduate, postgraduate. That's all. Nobody inquires,
"From which college, from which country, from which religion you have passed your M.A. examination?"
No. Similarly, nobody should inquire, "To which religion you belong?" One must see whether he has
learned this art, how to love God. That's all. That is religion.
Because here is the religion: sarva-dharm■n parityajya m■■ eka■ ■ara■a■ vraja (BG 18.66). This is
religion. Bh■gavata says. Dharma■ projjhita-kaitava■ atra: "All cheating type of religion is kicked out
from this Bh■gavatam." Only nirmatsar■■■m, nirmatsar■■■m, those who are not envious of God . . .
"Why shall I love God? Why shall I worship God? Why shall I accept God?" They are all demons. For
them only, ■r■mad-Bh■gavatam—for them only, those who are actually serious to love. Ahaituk■
apratihat■ yen■tm■ sampras■dati.
So real success of life is that when you learned how to love God. Then your heart will be satisfied. Ya■
labdhv■ c■para■ l■bha■ manyate n■dhika■ tata■ (BG 6.22). If you get K■■■a, or God . . . K■■■a
means God. If you have got another name of God, that is also accepted. But God, the Supreme Lord,
the Supreme Person, when you have got this . . . because we are loving somebody. The loving
propensity is there, in everyone. But it is misdirected. Therefore K■■■a says, "Kick out all these loving
objects. Try to love Me." Sarva-dharm■n parityajya m■m ekam (BG 18.66). In this way your loving will
never be able to satisfy you. Yen■tm■ sampras■dati. If you want real satisfaction, then you must love
K■■■a, or God. That is the whole philosophy of . . . Vedic philosophy. Or any philosophy you take.
Because after all, you want satisfaction of yourself, full satisfaction of your mind. That can be only
achieved when you love God. Therefore that religion is first class which teaches, which trains the
candidate how to love God. That is first-class religion. Sa vai pu■s■■ paro dharmo yato bhakti■ . . .
(SB 1.2.6). And that love not with a motive. Just like here in this material world, "I love you; you love
me," background is some motive. Ahaituky apratihat■. Ahaituk■, no motive. Any■bh■l■■it■-■■nyam
(Bhakti-ras■m■ta-sindhu 1.1.11). All other desires making zero. Zero. That will be taught in the
Bhagavad-g■t■. Any■bh■la■it■-■■nya■ jñ■na-karm■dy-an■v■tam (CC Madhya 19.167).
People are working . . . somebody is working for knowledge and somebody is working for sense
gratification. This is the material world. This is the material world. Somebody is trying to become very
big scholar, knowledge, "What is this? What is this? What is this?" Not for understanding God, but for
having some superfluous knowledge. So this is called jñ■na. And karma means working day and night
for sense gratification. So bhakti is transcendental. Any■bh■l■■it■-■■nya■
jñ■na-karm■dy-an■v■tam (Bhakti-ras■m■ta-sindhu 1.1.11). Not tinted by all these contamination,
jñ■na and karma.
Therefore Narottama d■sa ■h■kura says, jñ■na-k■■■a, karma-k■■■a, sakal■ vi■era bh■■■a:
either you are engaged in the activities ofkarmaor either you are engaged in the activities of speculating
knowledge or acquiring knowledge. This is jñ■na-k■■■a and karma-k■■da. So Narottama d■sa
■h■kura says that, "Both these, jñ■na-k■■■a and karma-k■■■a, are pots of poison. Either you drink
this or that, it doesn't matter." (break) he is spoiling the human form of life being engaged in
karma-k■■■a, jñ■na-k■■■a. He is spoiling his life. What benefit he will derive?
Karma-k■■■a—according to karma he'll get a different body. Jñ■na-k■■■a also. If you actually
become very much advanced in knowledge, you can get a body in a br■hma■a family, in a very
educated family. But I'll have to go through the transmigration of the soul, repetition of birth and death.
There is risk. I do not know what I am going to get. It is no guarantee. Little mistake. Little mistake . . .
just like Bharata Mah■r■ja, little mistake. At the time of . . . he was thinking of a deer. Next life he got
the life of a deer. Little mistake. Ya■ ya■ v■pi smaran loke tyajanty ante kalevaram (BG 8.6). Because
nature is so perfect, at the time of your death, what is the mental condition, you will get a similar body,
next life. Karma■■ daiva-netre■a (SB 3.31.1). Because daiva, K■■■a is with you. K■■■a will see,
"Now he is thinking of become a king," "Now he is thinking to become a dog."
So K■■■a immediately gives you. You take the body of a dog. You take the body of a lion. You take
the body of a king. Take the body . . . similarly, if you are thinking of K■■■a, take the body of a
K■■■a, immediately. Tyaktv■ deha■ punar janma naiti m■m eti kaunteya (BG 4.9).
This is K■■■a consciousness: how to train the mind to die thinking of K■■■a. Then your life is
successful. Therefore we have to chant Hare K■■■a, always think of K■■■a. Man-man■ bhava
mad-bhakto mad-y■j■ m■■ namaskuru (BG 18.65). Then your life is perfect.
Thank you very much.
Devotees: Haribol . . . (cut) (end)
