Prabhup■da:
(BG 2.9)
(Sañjaya said: Having spoken thus, Arjuna, chastiser of enemies, told K■■■a, "Govinda, I shall not
fight," and fell silent.)
Ladies and Gentlemen, I thank you very much for your coming here and participate in this great
movement. So this evening I shall present before you topics between K■■■a and Arjuna. I think most
of you know the Bhagavad-g■t■. The subject matter of Bhagavad-g■t■ is talking between K■■■a
and Arjuna. K■■■a was driver of the chariot. Both of them were in the Battlefield of Kuruk■etra.
K■■■a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He played just like an ordinary human being as friend of
Arjuna. And when Arjuna was little disturbed . . . because this battle was arranged between two parties
of cousin-brothers. And when Arjuna saw the other party, all his relatives, family members, so he
hesitated to fight, and there was some argument. K■■■a said that "You are a k■atriya. You are king. It
is your duty to fight."
According to Vedic system, there should be four classes of men: the br■hma■a, k■atriya, vai■ya,
■■dra, social order; and spiritual order: brahmac■r■, g■hastha, v■naprastha and sanny■sa. This is
perfect system of human civilization. So I shall briefly describe. Br■hma■a is compared with the head.
Just like you have got your body. In the body there are different departments: the head department, the
arms department, the belly department and the leg department. So to maintain your body fit, you must
have all these four departments rightly working. Your brain must work very nicely, your arms must work
very nicely, although also the digestive system, intestines, stomach, that must also work very nicely, as
well as the legs also must work nicely. Then you are perfectly fit. Similarly, in the social system there
must be the head department.
(aside) This child is disturbing.
The head department means the most intellectual part of the society, the most intelligent portion of the
society.
In the society there are naturally four classes of men—very intelligent class of men, politicians,
mercantile people and ordinary workers—in every society all over the world, all over the universe. You
can name them differently, but these four classes are there. That is by nature's system. C■tur-var■ya■
may■ s■■■a■ gu■a-karma-vibh■ga■a■ (BG 4.13).
(According to the three modes of material nature and the work ascribed to them, the four divisions of
human society were created by Me. And, although I am the creator of this system, you should know
that I am yet the non-doer, being unchangeable.)
By nature's way or by God's arrangement, there are four classes of men. The most intelligent class of
men is called the br■hma■as. Intelligent means one who knows up to the Supreme Lord. And then
next intelligent class: the politicians, administrators. Next intelligent class: the mercantile class, traders.
And the fourth-class man means worker. They have no intelligence, but they depend on others for their
livelihood. So there are first-class, second-class, third-class, fourth-class men everywhere, any part of
the world.
So the br■hma■as' duty is to give education, intelligence, up to the understanding of the Supreme
Absolute Truth, Brahman. The Absolute Truth is called Brahman. So one who knows Brahman, or the
Absolute Truth . . . knowledge means the end of knowledge should be up to the understanding of the
Absolute Truth, the original source of everything. Absolute, not relative. Relative truth, everyone knows,
but when one comes to the point of understanding the Absolute Truth, the original source of everything
. . . there must be original source of everything. That is Brahman.
Those who have read the Ved■nta philosophy . . . the Ved■nta philosophy describes Brahman. The
first aphorism in the Ved■nta philosophy is called ath■to brahma jijñ■s■. The Ved■nta philosophy
says that this human form of life is meant for understanding the Absolute Truth. One must be . . .
human being must be interested to know the Absolute Truth. That is perfection of human life. Because
in the cats' and dogs' life . . . unfortunately, at the present moment, people do not know what is the
distinction between cats and dogs and a human being. That is another defect of the modern education.
The distinction between cats and dogs . . . they are also living beings. Of course, in some quarter they
say that the cats and dogs and lower animals, they have no soul. No. That is not the fact. Everyone has
got soul, but the cats and dogs and animals, they are not advanced in consciousness. As soon as there
is soul, there must be consciousness. These things are described in the Bhagavad-g■t■, and you can
perceive also. I am existing in this body; you are existing in your body—how it is known? By the
consciousness. If I pinch your body, you feel pain. You pinch my body, I feel pain. Similarly, cats and
dogs, they also feel pain or pleasure. So that is the proof of existence of the soul even in cats and dogs
and human beings. The only difference is in the human form of life the consciousness is developed.
So developed consciousness means to understand the Absolute Truth. That is the special function of
the human being. Therefore the Ved■nta-s■tra says, "Now this human form of life is meant for
understanding the Absolute Truth, what is the original cause of everything." Because there must be
some cause. That is education. Just like your appearance is caused by your father; your father's
appearance is caused by his father. Similarly you go on researching, his father, his father, his father . . .
then ultimately you will come to the original father, whom you call God, K■■■a, or whatever you call.
There must be some original father. So the Ved■nta-s■tra explains when the question is that what is
the original cause of everything . . . what is Brahman? What is the Absolute Truth? Ath■to brahma
jijñ■s■: "Now this human form of life is meant for inquiring about the Absolute Truth." What is that
Absolute Truth? The next answer is, janm■dy asya yata■ (SB 1.1.1), means "The Absolute Truth is
that from whom everything emanates," or "The Absolute Truth is the original cause of all causes." This
is the . . . so this knowledge, anyone who has knowledge, not only this knowledge, absolute knowledge
as well as relative knowledge, such class of men is called the br■hma■as, the most intelligent class.
The next class is called the k■atriya. Just like when somebody comes to attack you, first of all your
brain gives you dictation, "Now this man is coming to attack you. You spread your hand." So
immediately my hand spreads and I want to protect myself. So these are called k■atriya class, or the
armies, from "arm." So next-intelligent class is the government class, administrator class. Then
next-intelligent class is third class. First class, br■hma■as, second class, the k■atriyas, and the third
class, the vai■yas, who maintain the society for economic condition, development of economic
condition, because we require things to consume to maintain this body. So these are called mercantile
class, and the ordinary man who is neither br■hma■a nor k■atriya nor vai■ya, he is called ■■dra.
So this is natural, natural division of the society. Unless human being comes to the natural division . . .
there is, but sometimes it happens that a ■■dra is taking the place of the br■hma■a or the br■hma■a
is obliged to act as a ■■dra. Then there is anomaly. There is some chaos in the society. So at the
present moment the education department does not distinguish who is a br■hma■a, who is a k■atriya,
who is a vai■ya or a ■■dra. And because the things have topsy-turvied, there is chaos all over the
world, not only here or there, because the division of labor or the division of working has been
overlapped.
Now this K■■■a consciousness movement is meant for creating some br■hma■as, or the most
intelligent class of men. There is no hindrance. Anyone can become br■hma■a. Just like in education
anyone can become engineer, anyone can become medical practitioner or anyone can become lawyer
if he takes such education from the very beginning, similarly, br■hma■a, k■atriya, vai■ya, ■■dra,
there are natural division of the society. But at the present moment there is scarcity of br■hma■a.
Br■hma■a means who has got very nice intellectual brain, who can understand the Absolute Truth. He
is called br■hma■a. So this K■■■a consciousness movement is trying to create some good brains so
that he can understand, one can understand what is the Absolute Truth. This is the movement.
So here the same instruction is there in the Bhagavad-g■t■, which is spoken by K■■■a, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. So when Arjuna was perplexed whether to fight or not to fight, he was very
much perplexed, and he accepted K■■■a as his spiritual master. ■i■yas te 'ha■ ■■dhi m■■
prapannam (BG 2.7):
(Now I am confused about my duty and have lost all composure because of weakness. In this condition
I am asking You to tell me clearly what is best for me. Now I am Your disciple, and a soul surrendered
unto You. Please instruct me.)
"My dear K■■■a, just now we are talking like friends, but this is a very important factor. I have to
decide. Now I accept You as my spiritual master, and You give me the right guidance." The whole
transaction of the Bhagavad-g■t■ is based on the talking of K■■■a and Arjuna only. So when Arjuna
decided that "I am not going to fight with my kinsmen, the other side, unless I am convinced that I have
to do it," so at that time,
(BG 2.9)
(Sañjaya said: Having spoken thus, Arjuna, chastiser of enemies, told K■■■a, "Govinda, I shall not
fight," and fell silent.)
Now he simply left his weapons, his arrows and bow. "My dear K■■■a, I am not going to fight." He left
everything and became silent. So at that time,
(BG 2.10)
(O descendant of Bharata, at that time K■■■a, smiling, in the midst of both the armies, spoke the
following words to the grief-stricken Arjuna.)
Then K■■■a was smiling, that "How is that? Arjuna is My friend, he is so advanced, and he has been
overcome by this temporary illusion. His duty is to fight, and in the presence of other party he is ready
to fight, and this man, My friend Arjuna, is declining to fight." So He was little astonished. Therefore
here it is said, prahasann iva, "smiling." Smiling because He thought that sometimes illusion takes
place even to a great personality like Arjuna. Therefore He was smiling. So hasann iva.
Then He said, ■r■ bhagav■n uv■ca. Bhagav■n uv■ca. K■■■a is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Bhagav■n. The Bhagav■n word is very significant. Bhaga means opulence. Opulence.
There are six kinds of opulences we experience. The wealth. If one is very rich, he is called opulent.
Ai■varyasya samagrasya v■ryasya. If one is very powerful, he is called also opulent. If one is very
wise, he is called opulent. If one is very beautiful, he is called opulent. Similarly, there are six kinds of
opulences, and when all these six kinds of opulences are possessed by somebody, He is called
Bhagav■n, Bhagav■n, or God. Opulences, you have got some riches, but you cannot claim that you
have got all the riches. The definition . . . there is definition of God given by Par■■ara Muni in the Vedic
literature:
(Full wealth, strength, fame, beauty, knowledge and renunciation—these are the six opulences of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.)
Who is Bhagav■n? Who is God? The person who possesses all the riches, all the strength, all the
wisdom, all the beauty, all renunciation, like that. He is called Bhagav■n. So there is definition.
Nowadays it has become a fashion that so many "Bhagav■ns" or "Gods" are coming. But there is
definition, there is test, who will be accepted as Bhagav■n.
So when K■■■a, Lord K■■■a, was present, He actually showed by His activities, by His behavior,
that He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For example—it may be unbelievable, but these are in
the history of K■■■a—that K■■■a married 16,108 wives. Now, it is unbelievable. We cannot maintain
even one wife. But He maintained 16,108 wives, and each wife had big palatial buildings. This
description we have got. So that means so far riches are concerned, K■■■a showed that there is no
second comparison in the whole history of the world that one is maintaining 16,000 wives and each wife
has got special palace. These descriptions are there.
Therefore K■■■a is accepted as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and by all the authorities of
Vedic knowledge. Formerly, during K■■■a's time, there were authorities like Vy■sadeva, like N■rada.
They also accepted that K■■■a is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. And you will find in the Tenth
Chapter of the Bhagavad-g■t■ Arjuna, after understanding K■■■a, he expressed his opinion: para■
brahma para■ dh■ma pavitra■ parama■ bhav■n puru■a■ ■■■vatam ■dyam (BG 10.12).
(Arjuna said: You are the Supreme Brahman, the ultimate, the supreme abode and purifier, the
Absolute Truth and the eternal divine person. You are the primal God, transcendental and original, and
You are the unborn and all-pervading beauty. All the great sages such as N■rada, Asita, Devala, and
Vy■sa proclaim this of You, and now You Yourself are declaring it to me.)
He accepted. And he also said that "I am not accepting . . . because it may be said that I am Your
friend, so I am accepting You as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but great ■c■ryas or great
stalwart authorities like Par■■ara Muni, Vy■sadeva, N■rada, Asita, Devala . . ." He gave evidence.
So K■■■a is accepted. So far Vedic literature is concerned, the ■c■ryas are concerned . . . recently,
within, say, two thousand years, there have been many ■c■ryas like ■a■kar■c■rya, Madhv■c■rya,
Nimb■rka, R■m■nuj■c■rya. They have all accepted K■■■a as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. And, say, within five hundred years, Lord Caitanya, He also accepted K■■■a. By His
symptoms, by the historical fact, by the evidence of the Vedas, He is accepted as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Therefore, when K■■■a is speaking, the very words are used, ■r■
bhagav■n uv■ca. Bhagav■n means the Supreme Personality of Godhead is speaking. Uv■ca means
speaking.
Then our point is that we should have to receive Godhead from the highest perfectional person.
Knowledge—our knowledge, your knowledge or anyone's knowledge—we are defect in four principles.
Our . . . we commit mistake. Every one of us who are sitting in this meeting, nobody can say that "I
have never committed any mistake." That is not possible. We commit mistake, everyone. We commit
mistakes and we are sometimes illusioned. Illusioned. That we can make experiment, that every one of
us at the present moment is illusioned. How it is? That I have . . . am not this body, but I am accepting
this body as "I am." The whole world is—I may say whole world, but at least the majority
portion—everyone is under the impression that "I am this body." But I am not this body. I am soul.
That will be instructed in the Bhaga . . . I am not this body. I am soul. I am spirit soul. There are so
many evidences. If I am this body, then when the soul is not there, the living entity is not there, the body
is simply a lump of matter. That is the difference between a dead body and living body. Living body
means that the soul is there, therefore the body is moving. And as soon as the soul is not there, the
body is nothing but a lump of matter. I think somebody as my father. I call, "Father," father immediately
replies, "Yes, my son." But when the soul of the father is not there, then the father, this body of the
father whom I am seeing as father, although he is there, still he cannot reply. This is the distinction.
So K■■■a is replying that "You are afraid of fighting with your kinsmen, but you are mistaken. You are
mistaken." Every one of us is mistaken, because there are four defects in our conditional life. This is our
conditional life. So long we are within this body, material body, that is our conditional life. We live under
certain conditions. But actually, we are spirit soul, we are part and parcel of God. As soon as we are
free from this conditional life, that is our real, actual life. That is called liberated life.
The human form of life is meant for getting this liberation. So long one does not get this human form of
life by the evolutionary process . . . there is evolution, from aquatic to birds and beast and then . . .
jalaj■ nava-lak■■■i (Padma Pur■■a). First aquatic life, then plant life, tree life, then insect life, then
bird's life, then beast life, then human life, then civilized human life. So this is the process of evolution.
Now, we are supposed to be civilized human being. This life is especially meant for how to get out of
this evolutionary process. How to get out of this evolutionary process. The evolutionary process means
transmigration of the soul from one body to another. We do not wish to die, but we have to accept
death. This is our conditional stage of life. I do not wish to take birth; still, I am forced to go into the
womb of my mother by the laws of nature. After giving up one body I enter another body. And there is
no security what kind of body I shall get next. It may be human body, it may be animal, it may be trees
or it may be better than human being, because there are three divisions. One division is called
demigod, and one division is called the human being. The other division is called lower than the human
being. N■-tiryag-deva. Deva means who are very highly advanced in knowledge. They are called
devas, and God conscious, K■■■a conscious, such men. There are different planets also for different
kinds of living entities.
So this knowledge is being imparted by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, not by a person like me
or like you who are defective in four principles. That I was going to explain. The four defects are that we
commit mistakes, we are illusioned, and our senses are imperfect and therefore sometimes we cheat
others. Although I know . . . I do not know a subject matter very clearly; still, I say something as
authority. That is cheating. We should not cheat. If we want to give knowledge to the people, we must
give perfect knowledge.
So perfect knowledge, how it can come? The perfect knowledge can come from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. This is the process of acquiring knowledge, so far we are concerned. Eva■
parampar■-pr■ptam ima■ r■jar■ayo vidu■ (BG 4.2).
(This supreme science was thus received through the chain of disciplic succession, and the saintly
kings understood it in that way. But in course of time the succession was broken, and therefore the
science as it is appears to be lost.)
The knowledge, perfect knowledge, is coming from K■■■a, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and if we receive that knowledge in cool head and assimilate, then our knowledge is perfect. Just like
we are preaching this K■■■a consciousness movement. This is perfect knowledge. If you inquire
whether I am perfect or my disciples who are preaching this K■■■a conscious movement, they are
perfect, we may be imperfect. We are imperfect. We accept we are imperfect. But we are distributing
the perfect knowledge. Kindly try to understand. We may be imperfect, but perfection means one who
assimilates the perfect knowledge, he is perfect.
I shall give you one example. Just like a post peon delivers you one hundred dollars. The post peon is
not rich man. He cannot deliver you the hundred dollars. But he . . . the money is sent by some, your
friend. He is honestly carrying that money and delivering you. That is the post peon's business.
Similarly, our duty to receive perfect knowledge from K■■■a and distribute it. Then it is perfect. This
knowledge, what we are distributing, it is not that we have created this knowledge by research work or
by so many other ways, by inductive process. No. Our knowledge is from the deductive process.
K■■■a said, "This is this." We accept. That is our movement, K■■■a consciousness. We may be
imperfect, but K■■■a is perfect. Therefore, whatever K■■■a says, if we accept it and if we . . . not
accept blindly, but you can employ your logic and argument and try to understand, then your knowledge
is perfect.
So here K■■■a said, when He saw Arjuna that he was not willing to fight, then K■■■a said,
(The Blessed Lord said: While speaking learned words, you are mourning for what is not worthy of
grief. Those who are wise lament neither for the living nor the dead.)
He immediate . . . because K■■■a was accepted as the spiritual master of Arjuna, He said in a very
gentle way, "My dear Arjuna," a■ocy■n anva■ocas tvam, "you are lamenting for something which is
not the subject matter of lamentation." Because Arjuna was hesitating to fight in bodily relationship. He
was thinking that he is this body; his other side, the relatives, brothers or nephews or grandfather, the
other side, they are also the bodies. Because bodily concept of life, we hesitate. Because every one of
us in bodily concept. That is animal life. And so long we are in the bodily relationship . . . dog, he does
not know anything else. He simply knows that he is this body. But a human being, by cultivation of
knowledge, by logic, by argument, he can understand that "I am not this body."
Therefore a human being says, as soon as you inquire . . . even a child. You ask child, you show him
the finger, "What is this?" The child will reply, "It is my finger." The child will never say "I finger." He will
say "my." So everything is "mine." "My body," "my head," "my leg." Everything is "mine," but where is
the "I"? That should be the inquiry, that "Everything, I am speaking 'mine.' Where is that 'I'?" As soon as
we come to this point, "Where is that 'I'?" then our human sense is developed. Otherwise we are in the
animal sense of life.
So K■■■a is, I mean to say, instructing Arjuna that a■ocy■n anva■ocas tvam (BG 2.11): "My dear
Arjuna, you are lamenting on the subject matter which is not the subject matter of lamentation."
A■ocy■n anva■ocas tva■ prajñ■-v■d■■■ ca bh■■ase. Prajñ■-v■d■■■ ca bh■■ase. "You are
talking like a very intelligent, learned scholar." Because in the previous chapter he was arguing with
K■■■a, giving evidences from ■■stra on the bodily concept of life. But he does not know the ■■stras
say, "One who is in the bodily concept of life, he is no better than an ass or cow." That he did not know.
So every one of us, we . . . there are so many big, big scholars. I shall give you one instance. I was
talking one big professor who is in Russia, Moscow, Professor Kotovsky. He said, "Sw■m■j■, after
death, everything is finished." That bodily concept of life. Even big, big educationist, big, big doctors,
philosophers, scientists, they have got this bodily concept of life. So K■■■a is first of all trying to
remove this bodily concept of life. He said, therefore, a■ocy■n anva■ocas tva■ prajñ■-v■d■■■ ca
bh■■ase (BG 2.11): "My dear Arjuna, you are talking like a very intelligent man, but you are lamenting
on the subject matter which is not at all lamentable." What is that? Gat■s■n agat■s■■■ ca
n■nu■ocanti pa■■it■■.
Pa■■it■■ means one who is learned. This body, either in living condition or dead condition, it is not
the subject matter of lamentation. This is the first education of spiritual life, that this body is actually
dead body already. So long the soul is there, it is moving. So when the soul leaves this body and
accepts another body, the body was already dead, a lump of matter, and now it is left aside, and the
soul has gone to another body. So it is a lump of matter at the present moment, then, after death or
after leaving, after the soul has gone from the body, it is the same lump of matter. So lump of matter,
where is the cause of lamentation or jubilation? It is a lump of matter. This understanding is first
required.
He said that pa■■it■■, those one who is learned, he does not lament on this lump of matter.
Actually, if you soberly analyze this body, what is this body? Actually, it is lump of matter. It is a
combination of bone and blood, flesh, urine, stool, nails and hairs. Otherwise, what you can find in it?
Do you mean to say by combining these ingredients, bones and flesh and urine and stool, you can
manufacture a very learned scholar? Is there any science that you can manu . . . ingredients . . . if the
bodily ingredients is the man, you take this. In a dead body you take all these ingredients, again
manufacture a similar man. But that is not possible. That is not possible.
So this is our ignorance. Therefore K■■■a said that "You are lamenting on a thing which is not at all
subject matter. It is a dead matter. It was dead matter, and it will remain dead matter." Just like this
apartment. I am living in this apartment; you are living in this apartment. I am not this apartment. When I
vacate, when you vacate this apartment, the apartment remains; we go to another apartment. Similarly,
it will be explained in the later verses,
(As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to youth to old age, the soul
similarly passes into another body at death. The self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change.)
Asmin dehe, "In this body, there is the proprietor, the soul." Dehino 'smin yath■ dehe. That, on account
of the proprietor, he is changing body. Changing body means . . . so long the soul is there. Suppose a
child is born. If the child is born dead, then this body will never grow. You can apply any chemicals or
any science; the body will remain the same. But so long the soul is there within the body, the child from
the babyhood will come to childhood, then childhood to boyhood, boyhood to youthhood. In this way the
body will change. We have changed so many bodies, every one of us. I knew . . . I know that I had a
childish body, I had a boyhood body, but those bodies are no more existing. But I am existing.
Therefore the conclusion should be that I, you, as soul, we are eternal. The body is changing.
This is our disease. Therefore this disease . . . this disease means birth, death, old age and disease. So
as soon as you accept this body, material body, you become subjected to the four laws of material
nature. These four laws of material nature are that as soon as you've accepted this body, then you
must accept death. Anything which is born must meet death also. Birth, death. And in the via media
there is old age and disease. This body, I have got, you have got, everyone. There is a death of getting
this body, and there will be a death of leaving this body. And between these two deaths there are so
many other miserable conditions. They are summarized: old age and disease.
But the real science is that "I am the soul. I am the part and parcel of the Supreme Lord. So Supreme
Lord, God, is eternal. I am also eternal." These things are described. Na hanyate hanyam■ne ■ar■re
(BG 2.20). As God . . . we are as good as God, at least in quality, not in quantity. We are . . . just like a
drop of seawater is as good as the seawater in quality—the whole seawater is also salty, and the drop
of seawater is also salty—similarly, we have got all the chemical composition, or qualities, of God. Now,
God is eternal; therefore we must be eternal. That is stated in the Bhagavad-g■t■. Na hanyate
hanyam■ne ■ar■re (BG 2.20). After destruction of this body, the soul is never destroyed. This is our
real, constitutional position. Then why we have accepted this changing process: birth, death, old age
and disease? This is our material life.
So this is the education, that we should understand what is our material life and what is our spiritual life.
Spiritual life means sac-cid-■nanda-vigraha (Bs 5.1).
(K■■■a who is known as Govinda is the Supreme Godhead. He has an eternal blissful spiritual body.
He is the origin of all. He has no other origin and He is the prime cause of all causes.)
Sat-cit-■nanda. Sat means eternal, cit means full of knowledge, and bliss means full of jubilation,
■nanda, pleasure. This is our constitution. This is God's constitution. This our constitution. The
difference between God and ourself is that God never accepts this material body, but sometimes we,
under certain circumstances, we have to accept this material body.
But never mind we have accepted this material body. We can get out of it. And the process for getting
out of it is K■■■a consciousness. This is the science. K■■■a consciousness movement means we
are teaching people how to get out of this entanglement of birth, death, old age and disease and
become as good as God. This is K■■■a consciousness movement. It is very scientific movement,
authoritative movement. So not only it is authoritative; it is accepted by millions and thousands. At least
in India there are many. And in the Western countries also, they are also accepting because it is
scientific. They are not fools and rascals. So our request is that you don't take this movement as
something sentimental, religious faith. No. It is a very scientific, educational movement. Take
advantage of it. That is our request.
You can understand this movement by reading so many books. We have got about two dozen books
like this. But we have got another, alternative method, which is very simple and easy: you chant Hare
K■■■a mah■-mantra. If you chant this mantra, Hare K■■■a, Hare K■■■a, K■■■a K■■■a, Hare
Hare / Hare R■ma, Hare R■ma, R■ma R■ma, Hare Hare, gradually everything will be clear. So we
are not selling this mantra; we are not asking any price for it. This Hare K■■■a mantra is open for
everyone.
So our request is that there is no loss on your part. You kindly take this mantra and chant. Begin
chanting Hare K■■■a, Hare K■■■a, K■■■a K■■■a, Hare Hare / Hare R■ma, Hare R■ma, R■ma
R■ma, Hare Hare. Then the result will be, gradually, all the misgivings within our heart will be cleansed.
Ceto-darpa■a-m■rjana■ bhava-mah■-d■v■gni-nirv■pa■am (CC Antya 20.12).
(Let there be all victory for the chanting of the holy name of Lord K■■■a, which can cleanse the mirror
of the heart and stop the miseries of the blazing fire of material existence. That chanting is the waxing
moon that spreads the white lotus of good fortune for all living entities. It is the life and soul of all
education. The chanting of the holy name of K■■■a expands the blissful ocean of transcendental life.
It gives a cooling effect to everyone and enables one to taste full nectar at every step.)
And as soon as our heart is cleansed, we can understand that "I am not this material body. I am spirit
soul. I have got different business. So long I am working for the maintenance of this body. Now I
understand that body is my superficial shirt and coat dress." One should not take simply care for the
shirt and coat. Any gentleman knows. Shirt and coat, we take care of course, but not that as the self.
Similarly, the present civilization is in a shirt-coat civilization, present civilization. They do not know
what is there within the shirt-coat. That they are missing. This K■■■a consciousness movement is
therefore very important. The missing point is being presented that you are not this body; you are within
this body, spirit soul. You just try to come out of this entanglement of birth, death, old age, and go back
to home, back to Godhead.
Thank you very much. Hare K■■■a. (break)
Madhudvi■a: . . . and she is saying that God is love . . .
Prabhup■da: No, that I explained, that K■■■a was advising to kill, to fight. That . . . he is explaining
that killing of the body is not killing of the soul.
Woman (1): But you can't . . . your body might be an illusion, but to you it's real. And if you abused your
life, then that's . . .
Prabhup■da: Fighting is a k■atriya's duty, you see. Just like I can give you one example: Just like one
man is ordered by the state that "This man should be hanged." Does it mean that the state is enemy of
this man?
Woman (1): I disagree with hanging completely.
Madhudvi■a: She also disagrees with hanging.
Prabhup■da: You may disagree, but what is the principle? Do you mean to say the state is wrong, the
government is wrong?
Woman (1): Yes.
Prabhup■da: Well, that is an individual opinion. But according to ■■stra, we have to understand that . .
. suppose your dress, something unclean dress, you have got. So if somebody says that "You take out
this unclean dress. Get a . . ." so is that very (sic) enimating. Because after all, the soul is within the
body. So if the body has become unclean, or some other reason, the body has to be changed, so that is
not lack of love. Therefore we have to understand actually what we are. Am I this body or something
else?
Woman (1): No, I quite agree that I'm spirit soul. I quite agree with that.
Prabhup■da: Then that's all right. So similarly, when there is duty, when . . . because I have already
explained that the k■atriyas are meant for maintaining the social order, the br■hma■a is meant for
giving good intelligence, the vai■yas are meant for maintaining the economic condition. So as the
government maintains the force, military police, their business is to chastise. This is required for
maintenance of the whole thing. So you cannot avoid this war, fighting, when it is for good cause. We
should not be so foolish that war can be, I mean to say, completely abolished. That is not possible. If
you want to keep the social order, you must have to maintain the military strength, the police strength,
and the court or the university. Everything is required. You cannot neglect one of them. Similarly . . . but
if you are afraid of being killed—that is the medicine we are preaching—then you get out of this
entanglement. You be situated in your spiritual body. There is no more question of killing. But so long
you are in the material world, you have to abide by the rules and regulation of material nature. That you
cannot avoid.
Woman (1): Well, certainly I disagree with transmigration. I mean, if you're going to come back a plant
or a bee, there's not much point in trying to agree to such a thing.
Madhudvi■a: She says she does not agree with transmigration of the soul.
Prabhup■da: You may not agree. What you are?
Devotee: This lady fluctuates in her mind too much, and there are many other people here who would
like to ask questions too. Are there any other questions?
Woman (2): How do you regard suicide, and would there be any exceptional circumstances that might
justify it?
Prabhup■da: Suicide is not justified. Suicide is not justified. It is violation of nature's law. Nature gives
you a certain type of body to live in it for certain days, and suicide means you go against the laws of
nature; you untimely stop the duration of life. Therefore he becomes a criminal. Suicide is criminal even
in ordinary state laws. One cannot make suicide.
Woman (3): I understand that Hare K■■■a is a scientific movement. Do you think that there is a
scientific explanation for the way in which personal enlightenment by simply chanting Hare K■■■a?
Devotee: The question is that you have said that the Hare K■■■a movement is a scientific movement .
. .
Prabhup■da: Yes.
Devotee: . . . and she wants to know if you can offer a scientific explanation how the Hare K■■■a
mantra can give a person . . .
Prabhup■da: Yes. That is very easy to understand. Suppose you are sleeping, and if I vibrate some
sound, you can hear and can wake up. No other method will act. Suppose you are sleeping. Then I
have to call, "Mr. or Mrs. Such-and-such, please get up, get up, get up." You get up. Similarly, at the
present moment it is our sleeping stage. Therefore this transcendental vibration will awaken to spiritual
consciousness. Just try to understand. When one is asleep, the sound vibration can help him. Similarly,
at the present moment, in our material condition of life we are sleeping. This transcendental, spiritual
vibration will help you. That is the process.
Man (1): If you follow any one movement, then you automatically close your mind to other things.
Prabhup■da: Your business is how to get success of life. So any method you can accept, but your aim
should be one—how to get out of this material entanglement. So here we are presenting one
authorized movement, how to get out of this material entanglement. If you have got any other
movement or any other idea to get out of this material, that is also accepted. It is not that . . . but so far
we know, this movement is the only movement which can get you out of this entanglement. But if you
have got any other, alternative movement, we do not grudge. Just like our system is sa vai pu■s■■
paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhok■aje (SB 1.2.6).
(The supreme occupation (dharma) for all humanity is that by which men can attain to loving devotional
service unto the transcendent Lord. Such devotional service must be unmotivated and uninterrupted to
completely satisfy the self.)
We want to teach people to understand himself and to understand God. That is our method.
Man (1): Can I ask one more thing?
Prabhup■da: No. So if you have got any other method to understand yourself and God, you can follow.
We have no objection. But our method is that. We want to test that by following some method, either
call it religious or cultural, whether you have understood yourself and God. Then it is perfect. Otherwise
it is simply waste of time.
Man (1): I also understand that we are not this body, we are spirit, soul. But if it wasn't for your body you
are using now, you wouldn't be able to communicate this message to other people. So . . .
Prabhup■da: We do not neglect this body, but we don't identify it. That is our principle. Just like you
have got a car. It is helping you to take you from one place to another. You don't neglect it; we maintain
the car nicely. But we never identify. Suppose, some way or other, the car is damaged, is lost. Then I
do not become overwhelmed, because I know that I am not this car. I can get another car. That's all.
Man (2): Prabhup■da, in quite a few places in your writings you say that of all the billions of
astronomical bodies in this universe, that the sun is the only self-luminous one, the only one that gives
off its own light. Now, astronomers throughout the world are in universal agreement and teach as an
absolutely verifiable fact that there are millions of bodies in our universe that give off their own light, just
like our sun does; that our sun is just one of them. Now, on this point your teaching is diametrically
opposed to the teachings of all the qualified astronomers in the world, and I would like to know . . .
Prabhup■da: What is that astronomical calculation?
Madhudvi■a: He is saying that this . . . do you understand the question?
Prabhup■da: No. Explain.
Madhudvi■a: He is saying that in your teachings you say the sun is the only self-illuminous body in the
universe, whereas the scientists say that there is many millions of stars that are in the sky that are also
self-illuminous.
Prabhup■da: No. We say that there are innumerable universes. We say.
Man (2): But in this particular universe, we're talking about.
Prabhup■da: Yes.
(I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, whose effulgence is the source of the nondifferentiated Brahman
mentioned in the Upani■ads, being differentiated from the infinity of glories of the mundane universe
appears as the indivisible, infinite, limitless, truth.)
Jagad-a■■a-ko■i. Jagad-a■■a means universe, and ko■i means millions. So there are millions and
millions of universes, and in each universe there are millions and millions of planets. Yasya prabh■
prabhavato jagad-a■■a-ko■i-ko■i■v a■e■a-vasudh■di-vibh■ti-bhinnam (Bs 5.40). And each planet
is differently constituted. The atmosphere of each planet is different from another. This is God's
creation. Now as there are innumerable universes, there may be innumerable suns also.
Man (2): Yeah, but they say that's in this universe . . .
Prabhup■da: Just try to understand. Because there are innumerable universes, and in each and every
universe there is a sun, there is a moon, there is Venus, everything, so under the circumstances, as we
accept innumerable universes, automatically we accept innumerable suns. So where is the difference
between the astrologer and our . . .
Man (2): The astronomers also accept that there are innumerable universes, and they say that in each
one they have millions and millions of self-luminous stars, and in this one also, but you say that in this
one there is only the sun.
Prabhup■da: But do you think that I have to accept the astronomers blindly?
Man (2): Well, they say . . .
Prabhup■da: No. Why? Why? If there are innumerable suns, why they are not present at night? Why
you are suffering from want of one sun?
Man (2): Because we are much further away from the others than our particular one.
Prabhup■da: No. At least, we are not able to bring them into service. We are depending only on one
sun in this universe. You may say there are innumerable suns, but why the astronomers or the
scientists could not take advantage of another sun at night? Why it is darkness?
Man (2): Because we're much closer to this one than the others. We're much closer to this one.
Prabhup■da: Yes. That is . . . what is that?
Madhudvi■a: He says that the earth is much more closer to this sun than it is to other suns.
Prabhup■da: Anyway, we do not take. But we, according to our Vedic information, this is only one
universe, which is within our vision, this sky, the dome. That is one universe. The other universes are
outside this universe. That is the Vedic information.
Devotee: Are there any other questions?
Man (3): Each of us have come here tonight sort of looking for a bit of a miracle or a bit of a statement
that can stamp us, to hold us, to illuminate us. (devotees laugh) Now, you travel in a spirit. Can you tell
us the wonderful feeling of enlightenment to enter this spirit? We don't know how to exactly enter this
spirit and travel as you travel.
Prabhup■da: That I am distributing. You chant at home, Hare K■■■a, Hare K■■■a, K■■■a K■■■a,
Hare Hare, and see the result. (laughter) It is not difficult. If there is no expenditure, there is no loss if
you chant Hare K■■■a mantra and you see the result at home. You haven't got to travel. You sit down
at your home and chant Hare K■■■a.
Man (3): The word travel . . . illumination. Each of us wants to know that beautiful, glorious feeling and
how we gain it.
Prabhup■da: That glorious . . . first of all we must know what we are. The mistake is that we are
accepting this body as ourself. I am thinking Indian, you are thinking Australian, he is thinking
American, he is thinking Muhammadan, he is thinking Hindu. In this way, because we are thinking
different way, we have got difference of opinion. But as soon as we come to the spiritual platform, there
will be no more different opinion. That we are trying, that come to the spiritual platform. Then everything
will go on. The first lesson of coming to the spiritual platform is to understand that "I am not this body."
This the first lesson of spiritual understanding.
Man (4): I've read about Hubbard's Scientology, and a lot of the writings that Hubbard writes sound a lot
like the theory of Hare K■■■a. Is there any parallel at all between the two, or have you taken any
opinion on side, both your cases? You know anything about that?
Madhudvi■a: He is saying is there any similarities between the philosophy of Scientology . . .
Prabhup■da: What is that Scientology? I do not know. (laughter) (applause) I do not know. Can you
explain what is this Scientology?
Man (4): It's just a teaching that's supposed to be fairly widespread. (laughter)
Madhudvi■a: Yes?
Man (5): Can you give any explanation about the spiritual, around the earth? If they are all luminous?
Madhudvi■a: He wants to know something about psychic phenomena.
Prabhup■da: Psychic phenomena is the subtle materialism. There are two material conditions: one
gross condition, one subtle condition. Gross condition is created by the five elements—earth, water,
fire, air and ether. And the subtle elements are mind, intelligence and ego, false ego. So all these eight
elements, they are material. One section is gross, and another section is subtle. So the psychology
means the subtle material elements. It is material; it is not spiritual. It is subtle.
Man (6): At rebirth do we all return as a male if the previous existence was a male, or do we change?
(laughter)
Madhudvi■a: He is asking when you take birth again do you take birth as the same sex, or do you
change your sex?
Prabhup■da: No, no. Just like you change your body, you change your shirts, it is not necessary that
you will get the same type of shirt. No. That you . . . just like if your present shirt you want to change,
and you go to the store and you purchase another shirt and coat, that will depend on your choice and
the price you can pay. It is not necessarily that you will get the same type of shirt and coat. Therefore,
when we change our body, there is no guarantee that we get the same type of body. A male can get a
female body. There are many instances like that. And a female can get the male body. A man can get
animal body, like that. So in the Bhagavad-g■t■ it is said, deh■ntara-pr■pti■ (BG 2.13), echange of
body. But what kind of body you are going to change, that will depend on your own work.
Man (7): Is this your last body? If so, how do you know? (laughter)
Prabhup■da: What is that?
Madhudvi■a: He is asking you if this is your last body.
Prabhup■da: I think so. (laughter) Not only I; all of my disciples. They are going to . . . because we are
not speaking nonsense. This is there in the Bhagavad-g■t■. Tyaktv■ deha■ punar janma naiti m■m
eti kaunteya (BG 4.9).
(One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities does not, upon leaving the
body, take his birth again in this material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna.)
Janma karma me divya■ yo j■n■ti tattvata■. Anyone who understands K■■■a factually, the result is
tyaktv■ deham, giving up this body, he never accepts again material body. He goes back to home,
back to Godhead. Therefore, because we are trying to understand K■■■a, and if by K■■■a's grace
we can understand Him, then we are not again going to accept any material body. That's a fact.
Man (8): I have some sympathy for you, sir, but I think that tonight you have been postulating the old
concept that most of our established religions have thrown out, that is that the reward for the miseries
of this life lie in the transmigration of one's soul. But . . .
Prabhup■da: Yes. That is actual misery.
Man (8): But, but, but . . . in the West, our theologies have taught us that we no longer believe in
heaven, we no longer believe in hell, we no longer believe in a soul. So I think that if you want to
generate some sympathy, you had better change your tack. (laughter)
Prabhup■da: No, I . . . if you do not believe, that does not mean the things become null and void. That
is not a fact. Suppose a thief does not believe in the prison house. That does not mean the prison
house will be closed. A thief may think like that—that is another thing—but the prison house will
continue, and as soon as you commit theft, you will be put there. That's all.
Man (8): I think that there is no point in answering a question with a parable. In point of fact, the things
you've been postulating tonight is a denial of observable truth.
Madhudvi■a: Of what truth?
Pu■■a K■■■a: Observable truth.
Prabhup■da: Yes. It is truth. (laughter) Anyone who has got eyes to see, he can see the truth.
Man (9): Do you believe in the essential unity of religious paths in such a way that soon people will take
to God and yoga?
Madhudvi■a: He said do you believe in any unity between religious paths.
Prabhup■da: Yes, religion is only one. Just like religion . . . our definition of religion is dharma■ tu
s■k■■d bhagavat-pra■■tam (SB 6.3.19):
(Real religious principles are enacted by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Although fully situated
in the mode of goodness, even the great ■■is who occupy the topmost planets cannot ascertain the
real religious principles, nor can the demigods or the leaders of Siddhaloka, to say nothing of the
asuras, ordinary human beings, Vidy■dharas and C■ra■as.)
"Religion means the laws and the codes given by God." That is religion. Now, God is one. God cannot
be two. And what He says, that is also one. So if we accept that one law of God, that is religion. Then
there is unity. But if you create your own religion by your imagination, that is another thing. Religion
means the laws given by . . . just like state law. State law is acceptable by everyone. I have given this
instance: the state law is that "Keep to the right" or "left." Everyone accepts. There is no disunity. So if
we actually take the words of God, then there is unity. But if we do not take, if we create our own
system of religion, that is a different thing.
Man (9): But this is, in fact, what we do. This is how we exist, by our own government. By no other
government, by no other observable government.
Prabhup■da: But the question was unity. If you take only the word and the codes of God, there is unity.
Otherwise there is disunity. If you say that "State may say that 'Keep to the left.' I will go to the right,"
that is your decision. But people accept. This is law. Similarly . . . that is our definition, that "First-class
religion is that which teaches its follower how to love God." That is first-class religion. We don't say that
Christianity is first class or Hinduism first class, or . . . no. Any religion which teaches or trains one
perfectly how to love God, that is first-class religion.
Man (10): Can the human consciousness transcend time?
Prabhup■da: No. Time is unlimited. How you can transcend?
Woman (4): How do you regard abortion? At what stage does the spirit . . .
Prabhup■da: Most abominable.
Woman (4): What stage does the spirit enter into the womb?
Madhudvi■a: What stage does the spirit enter into the womb?
Prabhup■da: Spirit, as it is, spirit—very small. It is mentioned in the ■■stra. The dimension of the spirit
is one ten-thousandth portion of the tip of the hair—very small particle, smaller than the atom. This
atom enters into the father's semina, and the semina is injected in the mother's womb, and then the two
seminas, being emulsified, it creates a small body like a pea. And because the spirit soul is there, it
develops into body. This is the science.
Woman (5): Are you saying that the mother does not enter or do anything into the spirit of the child?
Prabhup■da: What is that?
Madhudvi■a: She is speaking for woman's rights.
Prabhup■da: What is that right? Because you are woman, you have to be pregnant. What is that? How
you can avoid it?
Man (3): No, no. It's a serious question. You should answer it. It's a serious question.
Madhudvi■a: She is saying that the woman has nothing to do with the spirit soul.
Prabhup■da: Well, woman herself is a spirit soul. How she can say like that? Everyone is spirit soul,
either woman . . . woman and man—this is body. But everyone is spirit soul.
Man (11): I might answer that question for her. You can lead the horse to water but you can't make it
drink
Man (3): That's no answer either.
(everyone starts talking)
Devotee: We can chant?
Prabhup■da: Just chant Hare K■■■a.
Woman (5): From the father, what about the mother? (end)
