Pradyumna: O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo
bhagavate v■sudev■ya. (leads chanting of verse) (Prabhup■da and devotees repeat)
tam—unto him; uv■ca—said; h■■■ke■a■—the master of the senses, K■■■a; prahasan—smiling;
iva—like that; bh■rata—O Dh■tar■■■ra, descendant of Bharata; senayo■—of the armies;
ubhayo■—of both armies; madhye—between; vi■■dantam—unto the lamenting one; idam—the
following; vaca■—words.
Translation: "O descendant of Bharata, at that time K■■■a, smiling, in the midst of both armies, spoke
the following words to the grief-stricken Arjuna."
Prabhup■da: Hm. So h■■■ke■a■, prahasann iva. K■■■a began to laugh, smiling—"What a
nonsense this is, Arjuna." First of all he said: "Put me . . ." Senayor ubhayor madhye ratha■ sth■paya
me acyuta (BG 1.21): "K■■■a, just put my chariot between the two parties of soldiers."
(aside) Bring me water.
And now . . . he was so enthusiastic in the beginning that, "Put my chariot between the two armies."
Now this rascal is saying na yotsya, "I'll not fight." Just see the rascaldom.
So even Arjuna, K■■■a's direct friend, m■y■ is so strong that he also becomes a rascal, what to
speak of others. First of all very enthusiasm, "Yes, put my chariot between the two armies." And now in
the . . . na yotsya iti govindam (BG 2.9): "I am not going to fight." This is rascaldom. So he was smiling,
that "He is My friend, direct friend, and such a big . . . and he is now saying that 'I will not fight.' "
So K■■■a smiling, this smiling is very significant, prahasann. Tam uv■ca h■■■ke■a■ prahasann iva
bh■rata, senayor ubhayor vi■■dantam, lamenting. First of all he came with great enthusiasm to fight;
now he is lamenting. And K■■■a is mentioned here as H■■■ke■a. He is solid. He is Acyuta. He is
solid. He is not changed. Another significance of this word H■■■ke■a . . .
Because in N■rada-Pañcar■tra the bhakti means h■■■ke■a-sevanam. Therefore this very name is
mentioned here, H■■■ke■a. H■■■ke■a-sevana■ bhaktir ucyate. Bhakti means to serve
H■■■ke■a, the master of the senses. And the master of senses . . . some rascals are describing that
K■■■a is immoral. He is master of senses, and He is immoral. Just see how he has studied
Bhagavad-g■t■.
If K■■■a is perfect brahmac■r■ . . . K■■■a is perfect brahmac■r■, for . . . it was declared by
Bh■■madeva. Bh■■madeva is the first-grade brahmac■r■ in the universe. He promised to
Satyavat■'s father . . . you know the story. Satyavat■'s father . . . his, Bh■■madeva's father was
attracted by a fisher woman, fisher girl. So he wanted to marry. And the father of the girl denied, "No, I
cannot give my daughter to you." So "Why? I am king, I am asking your daughter." "No, you have got a
son." Bh■■madeva was the son of his first wife, Mother Ganges.
The Mother Ganges was wife of Santanu Mah■r■ja, and Bh■■madeva was the only remaining son.
The contract was between Santanu Mah■r■ja and Ganges, Mother Ganges that, "I can marry you if
you allow me that all the children born I shall throw in the water of the Ganges. And if you do not allow
me, then immediately I shall leave your company." So Santanu Mah■r■ja said: "All right, still I shall
marry you." So she was throwing all the children in the Ganges. So this Bh■■madeva . . . so after all,
father, so he became very much sorry that, "What is this? What kind of wife I have got? She is simply
throwing all the children in the water." So at the time of Bh■■madeva, Santanu Mah■r■ja said: "No, I
cannot allow it. I cannot allow it." Then Mother Ganges said: "Then I am going." "Yes, you can go. I
don't want you. I want this son."
So he was wifeless. Again he wanted to marry the Satyavat■. So the father said: "No, I cannot give my
daughter to you, because you have got a son, grown-up son. He will be king. So I cannot give my
daughter to you to become your maidservant. Her . . . if I would have thought that her son would be the
king, then I can offer you my daughter." So he said: "No, that is not possible." But Bh■■madeva
understood that, "My father is attracted with this girl." So he approached, that . . . he said to the
fisherman that, "You can offer your daughter to my father, but you are thinking that I shall become king.
So your daughter's son will be king.
On this condition you can offer your daughter." So he replied: "No, I cannot." "Why?" "Now, you may
not be king, but your son may be king." Just see, this material calculation. Then at that time he said:
"No, I shall not marry. That's all. I promise. I shall not marry." So he remained brahmac■r■. Therefore
his name is Bh■■ma. Bh■■ma means very solid, firmly fixed. So he was a brahmac■r■. For the sake,
for the satisfaction of his father's senses, he remained brahmac■r■.
So Bh■■madeva, in R■jas■ya-yajña, admitted that, "Nobody is better brahmac■r■ than K■■■a. He
was within the gop■s, all young girls, but He remained a brahmac■r■. If I would have been within the
gop■s, I do not know what was . . . what would have been my condition." So therefore K■■■a is the
perfect brahmac■r■, H■■■ke■a. And these rascals, they are saying that K■■■a is immoral. No.
K■■■a is perfect brahmac■r■, dh■ra. Dh■ra means one who is not agitated even there is cause of
being agitated.
So K■■■a is such a brahmac■r■. In spite of in His . . . just on the verge of youthhood, at the age of
fifteen, sixteen years, all the village girls were friends, they were very much attracted with K■■■a's
beauty. They used to come to K■■■a for dancing in the village. But He was brahmac■r■. You will
never hear that K■■■a had some illicit sex. No. There was no such thing description. The dancing is
description, but no contraceptive pill. No. That is not described here. Therefore He is H■■■ke■a.
H■■■ke■a means perfect brahmac■r■. Vik■ra-hetu, even there is cause of being agitated, He is not
agitated. That is K■■■a. He has got thousands and thousands of devotees, and some of the devotees,
if they want K■■■a as lover, K■■■a accepts that, but He does not require anyone else. He does not
require. He is self-sufficient. He does not require anyone's help for His sense gratification. Therefore
K■■■a is H■■■ke■a, the master of the senses.
So at least K■■■a's devotees . . . there are many instances of K■■■a's devotees, they are also . . .
why many? Almost all devotees, they are master of the senses, gosv■m■. Just like Harid■sa
■h■kura, you know. Harid■sa ■h■kura was young man, and the village zamindar, he was
Muhammadan. So everyone was eulogizing Harid■sa ■h■kura, such a great devotee. So the
zamindar, the village zamindar, he became very much envious. So he employed one prostitute to
pollute Harid■sa ■h■kura. And she came at dead of night, nicely dressed, attractive. She was also
young, very beautiful. So she proposed that, "I have come, being attracted by your beauty." Harid■sa
■h■kura said: "Yes, that's all right. Come on, sit down. Let me finish my chanting. Then we shall
enjoy." So she sat down. But Harid■sa ■h■kura chanting, he was chanting . . . we, we cannot chant
even sixteen rounds, and he was chanting three times sixty-four rounds. How many it is?
Revatinandana: A hundred and ninety-six.
Prabhup■da: Hundred and ninety-six rounds. That was his only business: Hare K■■■a, Hare K■■■a,
K■■■a . . . so sometimes somebody wants to imitate Harid■sa ■h■kura. It is not possible.
So Harid■sa ■h■kura, when it became morning, the prostitute, "Sir, now it is morning." "Yes, next
night I shall . . . come next night. Today I could not finish my chanting." That was a plea. In this way
three days passed. Then the prostitute became converted, fell down on his (her) . . . "Sir, I came to
pollute you. Now save me; I am so fallen." So Harid■sa ■h■kura said: "Yes, I know that. I could have
leaved this place immediately when you came, but I wanted that you have come to me, you may be
converted to this Vai■■avism." So the prostitute became a great devotee by the mercy of . . . Harid■sa
■h■kura said that, "You sit down in this place. You chant Hare K■■■a before this tulas■ plant. Now I
am leaving this place."
So k■■■a-bhakti is like that—full control over the senses. As K■■■a has got full control over the
senses, similarly, those who are actually K■■■a devotees, they have got full control over the senses.
H■■■ke■a. Just like Yamunac■rya, he is praying, he is speaking:
"Since I have begun to feel transcendental bliss, being taken shelter of the lotus feet of K■■■a,"
yad-avadhi mama citta■ k■■■a-pad■ravinde, k■■■a-pad■ravinde, the lotus feet of K■■■a. "Since
my citta, my heart, has been attracted by the lotus feet of K■■■a," tad-avadhi bata n■r■-sa■game,
"since then, as soon as I think of sex life," bhavati mukha-vik■ra■, "I hate, I spite on it." This is
k■■■a-bhakti. K■■■a-bhakti is like that. Bhakti-pare■■nubhava viraktir anyatra sy■t (SB 11.2.42).
This most attractive feature in this material world is sex. That is the foundation of material life. All these
people are working so hard day and night only for that sex enjoyment. Yan maithun■di-g■ha . . . they
have taken so much risk. They are working, karmis, they are working so hard. What is their pleasure of
life? The pleasure of life is sex. Yan maitun■di-g■hamedhi-sukha■ hi tuccham (SB 7.9.45). Very
abominable activities, but that is their pleasure. This is material life.
So K■■■a is not like that. But the rascals, they paint picture, and that pictures are very much
appreciated, that K■■■a is embracing gop■s. Somebody was telling me that . . . last . . . who came?
That K■■■a's picture.
Ha■sad■ta: . . . (indistinct)
Prabhup■da: So when K■■■a is killing Putan■, that picture they will not paint, or killing Ka■sa, or . . .
K■■■a has got so many pictures. These pictures they will not, artist. They will simply paint the
pictures, His confidential dealing with the gop■s. One who cannot understand K■■■a, what is
K■■■a, which Vy■sadeva has described what is K■■■a in nine cantos to understand K■■■a, and
then in the Tenth Canto he begins the birth advent of K■■■a . . . but these rascals, they jump over
immediately to the r■sa-l■l■.
First of all understand K■■■a. Just like if you become a friend of some very big man, so first of all try
to understand him. Then you'll try to understand his family affairs or confidential things. But these
people jump over to the r■sa-l■l■, and misunderstand. And therefore they sometimes say: "K■■■a is
immoral." How K■■■a can be immoral? By accepting, by chanting K■■■a's name, the immoral
persons are becoming moral, and K■■■a is immoral. Just see the foolishness. Simply by chanting
K■■■a's name, all immoral persons are becoming moral. And K■■■a is immoral. And it is spoken by
a rascal professor.
So it is very difficult. Nobody can understand K■■■a without become a pure devotee of K■■■a.
Because K■■■a says, bhakty■ m■m abhij■n■ti y■v■n yas c■smi tattvata■ (BG 18.55). Tattvata■,
in truth. Tattvata■ means truth. If one wants to understand K■■■a as He is, then he has to take this
process of devotional service, bhakta, bhakti. H■■■ke■a h■■■ke■a-sevana■ bhaktir ucyate (CC
Madhya 19.170). When one is employed as the servitor of H■■■ke■a, the master of senses . . .
master, and h■s■ke■a, when your senses are also engaged in the service of the master of the
senses, then you also become master of the senses. You also. Because your senses are engaged in
the service of the H■■■ke■a, the senses have no other opportunity to be engaged. Locked up. Sa vai
mana■ k■■■a-pad■ravindayo■ (SB 9.4.18).
So this is the process of devotional service. If you want to become master of the senses, gosv■m■,
sv■m■, then you should always keep your senses engaged in the service of H■■■ke■a. That is the
only way. Otherwise it is not possible. As soon as you become a little slack to engage your senses in
the service of the master of the senses, immediately m■y■ is there, "Come on, please." This is the
process.
As soon as you forget K■■■a, even for a moment, immediately m■y■ is there, "Please, my dear
friend, come here." Therefore we have to become very cautious. We cannot forget K■■■a even for a
moment. Therefore the chanting process, Hare K■■■a, Hare K■■■a, K■■■a K■■■a, Hare Hare/
Hare R■ma, Hare R■ma, R■ma . . . always remember K■■■a. Then m■y■ will not be able to touch
you. M■m eva ye prapadyante m■y■m et■n taranti (BG 7.14). M■y■ cannot touch. Just like Harid■sa
■h■kura, he was engaged in the service of H■■■ke■a. M■y■ came in full-fledged strength. Still, she
was defeated; Harid■sa ■h■kura was not defeated. So try to understand K■■■a as H■■■ke■a.
So H■■■ke■a, K■■■a, began to laugh that, "He is My friend, constant associate, and such
weakness. He first of all was enthusiastic to ask Me to keep his chariot, senayor ubhayor madhye. Now
vi■■dantan, now he is lamenting." So . . . we are all fools like that. Arjuna is not fool. Arjuna has been
described as Gu■■ke■a. How he can be fool? But he is playing the part of fool. If he does not play the
part of a fool, how this Bhagavad-g■t■ will come from the mouth of ■r■ K■■■a? And because he is
devotee, he is perfectly playing in such a way that K■■■a is giving instruction. So perfect teacher and
the perfect disciple, Arjuna. We have to learn from their de . . . our position . . . Arjuna is representing
just like ordinary man like us, and K■■■a as H■■■ke■a, giving His advice, perfect advice. If we take .
. . if we read Bhagavad-g■t■ in the spirit of understanding like Arjuna, the perfect disciple, and if we
accept the advice and instruction of K■■■a, the perfect teacher, then we should know that we have
understood Bhagavad-g■t■.
By my mental speculation, by rascal interpretation, by showing one's scholarship, you cannot
understand Bhagavad-g■t■. That is not possible. Submissive. Therefore in the Bhagavad-g■t■ it is
said, tad viddhi pra■ip■tena paripra■nena sevay■ (BG 4.34). So we have to surrender as Arjuna, he
surrendered. ■i■yas te 'ha■ ■■dhi m■■ prapannam (BG 2.7): "I surrender unto You. I become Your
disciple." To become disciple means to surrender, voluntarily accepting the instruction, the advice, the
order of the spiritual master. So Arjuna has already accepted that, although he is speaking that na
yotsye, "K■■■a, I shall not fight." But master, when He explains everything, he will fight. Master's
order. Not to fight, that is his own sense gratification. And to fight in spite of he had no desire to fight,
that is the satisfaction of the master. This is the sum and substance of Bhagavad-g■t■.
So K■■■a, seeing Arjuna vi■■dantam, very much affected, lamenting, that he is not prepared to do
his duty, therefore in the next verse He begins that a■ocy■n anva■ocas tva■ prajña-v■d■■■ ca
bh■■ase (BG 2.11): "My dear Arjuna, you are My friend. Never mind m■y■ is very strong. Despite
your being My friend, personal, you are so much overwhelmed with false compassion. So just hear
Me." Therefore He said, a■ocy■n, "You are lamenting on a subject matter which is not at all good."
A■ocya. ■ocya means lamentation, and a■ocya means one should not lament. A■ocya. So a■ocy■n
anva■ocas tva■ prajña-v■d■■■ ca bh■■ase. "But you are talking like very learned scholar."
Because he has talked. But those things are right.
What Arjuna has said, that var■a-sa■kara, when the women become polluted, the population is
var■a-sa■kara, that is fact. Whatever Arjuna has said to K■■■a in order to avoid the fighting, so those
things are correct. But from the spiritual platform . . . those things may be correct or incorrect, but from
spiritual platform, they are not to be considered very serious. Therefore a■ocy■n anva■ocas tvam.
Because his lamentation was on the bodily concept of life. That bodily concept of life, in the very
beginning of K■■■a's instructions, it is condemned. A■ocy■n anva■ocas tvam (BG 2.11): "You are
lamenting on the bodily concept of life." Because anyone who is in the bodily concept of life, he is no
better than animal.
So our all morality, all social status, all politics, all philosophy—everything is on this bodily concept of
life. We want to enjoy senses. Senses mean different parts of the body. So one who is interested with
the body—that means one who is interested with the senses—their only business is how to . . .(break)
(end)
