(translated into Spanish throughout)
Nit■i: (leads chanting of verse, etc.)
(break)
H■day■nanda: (leads chanting of synonyms in Spanish)
Prabhup■da:
(01:30) (translated throughout into Spanish)
■r■ Bhagav■n uv■ca. Bhagav■n means the Supreme Being. In the English dictionary when you
consult the word God, it is stated there, "the Supreme Being." What is that Supreme Being? We are all
living being, but amongst ourself there is comparative, superlative positions. I am here; you are here;
he is there. So you may be better than me, he may be better than you, and somebody else may be
better than him. In this way you go on searching after one better than the other. When you ultimately
come to a point that nobody is better than him, that is Bhagav■n.
Bhaga means opulence. So there are six kinds of opulences. One opulence is to become very rich.
Another opulence is to become very powerful. Another opulence is to become very strong. Another
opulence is to become very famous. Another opulence is to become very wise, and another opulence is
to become very much renounced. So these six kinds of opulences, when present in the superlative
degree, that is Bhagav■n. This means, as it is stated in the Vedic literature, na tasya sama■ adhika■
ca d■■yate: "Nobody is found equal to Him or greater than Him." In this material world, any person you
take, you'll . . . next moment you'll find somebody equal to him and somebody greater than him. But the
Vedic information is: God means who has no equal and who has no greater person than Him. Actually,
Bhagavad-g■t■ was spoken by K■■■a, and here it is said, Bhagav■n uv■ca. So Bhagav■n, the
Supreme God, means K■■■a. That is the statement in all Vedic literature.
Means that ■■vara, controller, the supreme controller, is K■■■a. We are also controller. I control a
few people, you control a few men, another control more men, another, more men, or . . . you can go
on. But the supreme controller, who controls everyone, all big controllers, that is K■■■a. Therefore,
when it is said, bhagav■n uv■ca, that means the version which is presented herewith was spoken by
the supreme controller.
So our process of receiving knowledge is from the supreme controller because, according to the
definition already given: wise, the most wise. K■■■a, or Bhagav■n, is the most wise. Therefore, if we
receive knowledge from the most wise, then there is no flaw. That is our principle, that we are receiving
from K■■■a, the supreme controller, directly. Just like when there is some misunderstanding, we take
help from the law books, because in the law book or in the law court, the decision is obligatory to both
the parties. So to give knowledge there are many, many parties, but when we receive knowledge from
the Supreme, that is all-inclusive. So here K■■■a says, a■ocy■n anva■ocas tva■ prajñ■-v■d■■■
ca bh■■ase (BG 2.11). Arjuna has accepted the guidance of K■■■a. He has said previously that "The
position is very perplexing. Therefore I accept You as my spiritual master, and You kindly give me
enlightenment." This is the process. We should approach the Supreme or the representative of the
Supreme. Just like the same example: when there is any controversy, we refer to the law book or to the
lawyer, or we take the decision of the law court, and that is final.
So here K■■■a says to Arjuna that . . . because he has accepted the leadership of K■■■a, therefore
K■■■a is chastising him in this way. He is chastising in this way, that Arjuna was talking with K■■■a
as friends. So friends means equal status. But he gave up that status. He took the status of a disciple.
A disciple means who voluntarily agrees to be disciplined by the spiritual master. When one becomes
disciple, he cannot disobey the order of the spiritual master. ■i■ya. ■i■ya, this word comes from the
root ■■s-dh■tu, means "I accept your ruling." So previously Arjuna has accepted, ■i■yas te 'ha■
■■dhi m■■ prapannam (BG 2.7): "I am now surrendered to You, and I agree voluntarily to accept Your
ruling." This is the relationship between the spiritual master and the disciple.
So we have got ten kinds of offenses in chanting the Hare K■■■a mantra. So the first offense is guror
avajñ■, means to disobey the orders of guru, spiritual master. One cannot disobey the orders of guru.
Caitanya Mah■prabhu, although He is K■■■a Himself, he also says, guru more m■rkha dekhi' karila
■■sana (CC Adi 7.71): "My guru, My spiritual master, saw Me a fool, and therefore he has chastised
Me." So therefore K■■■a . . . because Arjuna has accepted K■■■a as guru, therefore He is
chastising him that "You are lamenting on a subject matter which is not done by any learned man." That
means, "You are not a learned man. You are fool." "The learned man does not do like this"—that
means, "You are not learned man because you are doing this." So K■■■a said that "You . . .
practically you are not in the knowledge of things. Still, you are lamenting on the bodily concept of life."
Anyone who accepts this body as self, he is not only unlearned, but he is compared with the animal.
That is the statement in the Vedic literature,
Go means cow, and khara means ass.
So anyone who accepts this body as self, he is animal, he is not human being. That is the beginning of
knowledge. People are accepting knowledge from a school, college, university, but at the present
moment at least, how many people know that he is not body? Unless we understand this first principle
of knowledge, there is no question of spiritual advancement of life.
So the beginning of Bhagavad-g■t■ is to give lesson that we are not this body. It will be later on
explained that the spirit soul, or the real person, is within this body. Just like we are here. We are within
this shirt and coat, but we are not the shirt and coat. So if the shirt and coat is stolen and if somebody
becomes mad after it and lamenting, that is not very good sense. Therefore He is saying that a■ocy■n
anva■ocas tvam (BG 2.11): "You are lamenting on the subject matter which is never done by any
learned man."
So we shall go further on?
H■day■nanda: Purport?
Prabhup■da: Yes? Read it, you, purport in Spanish. (break)
H■day■nanda: (translating question from Spanish) . . . one does not follow the instructions of guru.
Prabhup■da: Then he's misguided. A ship without rudder, or without captain. A ship without captain.
H■day■nanda: (translating) He wants to know why Lord Caitanya is not mentioned in the Bh■gavatam
with the other incarnations.
Prabhup■da: He has not mentioned, but Bh■gavata has mentioned. No, you don't bring any other
question. You talk about this, which we have lectured. In this way, if you bring other question, that is not
. . . we are discussing one verse. You can put question on this, not irrelevant question. Of course, that
is not irrelevant, but not in connection with this verse. So question means in connection with this verse.
H■day■nanda: (translating) How can we come to understand perfectly the guru?
Prabhup■da: Hmm?
H■day■nanda: How can we understand the guru perfectly?
Prabhup■da: How do you understand? When you go for treatment to a physician, how do you
understand that "Here is a physician"? How do you understand? Tell me?
H■day■nanda: (translating) He says by reputation. He says by the title and reputation.
Prabhup■da: Yes. Some way or other, you know that he is a physician. So similarly, you have to find
out guru. Guru . . . first of all, who requires a guru? That is the question. Because guru is not a fashion .
. . the . . . it is said in the ■r■mad-Bh■gavatam, tasm■d guru■ prapadyeta (SB 11.3.21): "On account
of this, you should go to a guru." What is that account? Tasm■d guru■ prapadyeta jijñ■su■ ■reya
uttamam: "One who is very much inquisitive to know about spiritual affair, he requires a guru." Spiritual
affair means that . . . we are in this material world. We are suffering. When the question will come in
one's mind, "Why I am suffering?" that is spiritual. Just like an animal is being taken to the
slaughterhouse. He cannot inquire, "Why I am being taken to the slaughterhouse?" But if a man is
being taken forcibly, he'll protest, he will cry, he'll call crowd. Therefore human being can inquire about
spiritual affair.
So when there is spiritual inquiry, then one requires a guru. And by going to guru, as it is stated, tad
viddhi pra■ip■tena paripra■nena sevay■ (BG 4.34). One has to learn by surrendering, pra■ip■ta. So
first of all there must be a strong impulse to inquire about the transcendental subject matter. Then one
requires a guru. Not that to follow a fashion that one has guru. ■c■ryav■n puru■o veda. Unless one
becomes under the control of ■c■rya, he has no perfect knowledge. Therefore the Vedas says,
tad-vijñ■n■rtha■ sa gurum ev■bhigacchet (MU 1.2.12): "For understanding that transcendental
science, one must approach a guru." And what is the symptom of guru? Samit-p■■i■ ■rotriya■
brahma-ni■■ham: guru means one who has complete knowledge of Vedic version; and not only that,
he is a staunch or fixed-up devotee of the Supreme Lord. These are the qualification. The guru strictly
follows the Vedic injunction and teaches the same thing to his disciple. That is guru.
So first thing is: one must be inquisitive to understand about the spiritual subject matter. Just like you
have come here in this temple. You know that here nothing like political meeting is going on. Here
something spiritual matter is being discussed. Therefore you have come. This inclination is the
beginning of spiritual life. This is called ■raddh■. ■raddh■ means faith. So this ■raddh■ has to be
developed further, and to develop this ■raddh■, or faith, one has to associate with persons who are
keeping with this faith. Therefore it is said, ■dau ■raddh■ tata■ s■dhu-sa■ga■ (CC Madhya
23.14-15): "First of all faith, then to associate with persons who are devotees and faithful." In this way,
when further development is done, then atha bhajana-kriy■, means the learning the process of
devotional service.
(break) . . . no gambling, no meat-eating. These are not wanted. In the beginning of life nobody smokes
or nobody becomes intoxicated. It is learned by bad association. Similarly, it can be given up by good
association. They are called anarthas. Anartha means unwanted bad habits. So when we are children,
innocent, we have no bad habits, but as we grow and associate with bad company, we also acquire all
these bad habits. So to give up all these bad habits means we have to associate with s■dhus or
devotees, saintly person. Then we can give it up. This is called anartha-niv■tti, means giving up all
unwanted bad habits. These things are not wanted. Nobody dies if he does not smoke or drink. Nobody
dies. So artificially we learn it, so by good association we can give it up. So when we are purified out of
all the bad habits, then we become fixed up in spiritual knowledge. So in this way we make advance in
spiritual life, and at the last stage we become lover of God. This is the process, and one who teaches
this process, he is guru. This is the definition of guru.
H■day■nanda: (translating) It says here in this verse that a devotee is not . . . (indistinct) . . . on the
other hand, a devotee is also compassionate. So the question is what is the . . . (indistinct) . . .? Not
being sentimental, but not being impersonal, callous.
Prabhup■da: I do not know what you said. What he said?
Devotee: She said that if a devotee does not lament for the . . . (indistinct) . . . death, but at the same
time it is also said that the devotee is compassionate towards the living beings. So she asked here
what is the difference between the sentimentality and impersonalism? (devotee tries to explain again
what she means—indistinct)
Prabhup■da: What is that? I cannot follow.
Paramaha■sa: Well, there's a tendency for someone who hears this verse to think that one should
become callous to the sufferings of others.
Prabhup■da: Where it is?
Paramaha■sa: Well, there's a tendency to misunderstand it in that way.
Prabhup■da: No, when we are teaching, it is because the people are suffering on account of
ignorance. Therefore we are teaching. How we are callous? We are not callous; we are very much
sympathetic to give them knowledge. How do you say? The devotees are not callous. Why they are
touring all over the world, accepting so much trouble, opposition? Because they are very much
sympathetic with the people who are suffering out of ignorance. They are the most sympathetic friend
of the human society. So this is not true that they are callous. Hmm? So any other question?
H■day■nanda: (translating) If we've already committed so many offenses to chanting, now, at this
point, how can we purify ourselves?
Prabhup■da: If you don't commit offense. Why do you voluntarily commit offense? You should not
commit offense. Then it will be all right, purified.
H■day■nanda: (translating) He wants to know how we can increase our desire for sa■k■rtana
process.
Prabhup■da: By performing sa■k■rtana. Just like if a man drinks, and if he drinks, drinks, then he
become a drunkard. (laughter) Drink more and you become drunkard. Similarly, chant more and you
become perfect chanter.
H■day■nanda: (translating) He wants to know if the greatest offense is to disobey the spiritual master.
Prabhup■da: Yes, that is the first offense. Guror avajñ■, ■ruti-■■stra-nindanam.
■ruti-■■stra-nindana■ guror avajñ■ (Padma Pur■■a). If you accept guru and again disobey him, then
what is your position? You are not a gentleman. You promise before guru, before K■■■a, before fire,
that "I shall obey your order; I shall execute this," and again you do not do this. Then you are not even a
gentleman, what to speak about devotee. This is common sense.
H■day■nanda: (trying to understand Spanish question)
Prabhup■da: You cannot understand? What is that?
H■day■nanda: A devotee, how can he control his tongue?
Prabhup■da: He can take pras■dam. (laughter) Bhaktivinoda ■h■kura has said like that, t■'ra
madhye jihw■ ati, lobhamoy sudurmati, t■'ke jet■ ka■hina sa■s■re: "Out of all the senses, the tongue
sense is very powerful. So it is very difficult to control it." So he says, t■'ra madhye jihw■ ati, lobhamoy
sudurmati: "The tongue is very greedy and very difficult to be controlled. Therefore K■■■a has given
us one weapon." What is that? K■■■a ba■o doy■moy, korib■re jihw■ jay, swa-pras■d-anna dilo
bh■i: "K■■■a is very kind. Therefore He has given us His remnants of foodstuff." So if we make this
promise, that "I shall not take anything which is not offered to K■■■a," then your tongue will be
controlled. And in the ■■stra it is said that you cannot understand K■■■a . . . Ata■
■r■-k■■■a-n■m■di. Not only K■■■a; even His name you cannot understand with these imperfect
senses.
But when you engage your tongue in the service of K■■■a, then K■■■a reveals Himself. So the
tongue's business is twofold. One is with tongue we speak—we vibrates sound—and another business
is with tongue we taste nice foodstuff. So if you engage this tongue in the matter of K■■■a's service by
vibrating Hare K■■■a mantra, and if you don't allow your tongue to touch anything which is not offered
to K■■■a, then you become immediately K■■■a-realized soul. So when the tongue is controlled, all
other senses are automatically controlled. This is the process.
Now again engage your tongue, chanting Hare K■■■a. (end)
