Pradyumna: (leads chanting of verse) (Prabhup■da and devotees repeat)
(break)
(break)
"It is better to live in this world by begging than to live at the cost of the lives of great souls who are my
teachers. Even though they are avaricious, they are nonetheless superiors. If they are killed, our spoils
will be tainted with blood."
Prabhup■da: Hm. So the first problem was, for Arjuna, how to kill the kinsmen, family men. Now, when
he was chastised by K■■■a as a friend, that "Why you are so weak? Don't be weak. This is sentiment.
This kind of compassion is sentiment. Utti■■ha. You better get up and fight . . ." But we can . . . if I do
not want to do something, I can offer so many pleas. You see? So next he is presenting, gur■n: "All
right, K■■■a, You are talking about my kinsmen. I accept that it is my weakness. But how do You
advise me to kill my guru? Dro■■c■rya is my guru. And Bh■■madeva is also my guru. So do You
want me to kill my guru?" Gur■n hi hatv■. "And not only ordinary guru.
This is not that they are ordinary men." Mah■nubh■v■n. "Bh■■ma is a great devotee, and similarly,
Dro■■c■rya also, a great personality." Mah■nubh■v■n. So katha■ bh■■mam aha■ sa■khye
dro■a■ ca madhus■dana (BG 2.4): "They are two great personalities. They are not only my gurus, but
they are great personality." And K■■■a, K■■■a is addressed "Madhus■dana." Madhus■dana means
. . . Madhu was K■■■a's enemy, a demon. So He killed. So "You are Madhus■dana, You are killer of
Your enemies. Can You give me any evidence that You have killed Your guru? So why You are asking
me?" This is the purport. I■ubhi■ pratiyotsy■mi p■j■rh■v ari-s■dana. Again ari-s■dana. Ari means
enemy. Madhus■dana, particularly "the killer of the Madhu demon." And next is Arisudana. Ari means
enemy.
So K■■■a has killed so many demons, ari, who came to fight with Him as enemy. Therefore His name
is Arisudana. So K■■■a has got enemies also, what to speak of ourself. This material world is so
made that you must have some enemies. Matsarat■. Matsarat■ means enviousness, jealousy. This
material world is like that. So there are jealous enemies of God also. They are called demons. Ordinary
jealousy or enemy, that is natural. But even to God. Just like yesterday night, evening, somebody came
to see me. He was arguing that, "Why K■■■a should be accepted as God?" That was his argument.
So K■■■a has enemies.
Therefore K■■■a . . . not only He, but everyone who is in the material world is enemy of K■■■a.
Everyone. Because they want to be competitor of K■■■a. K■■■a says that bhokt■ram: "I am the
supreme enjoyer." Sarva-loka-mahe■varam (BG 5.29): "I am the Supreme proprietor." And the Vedas
also confirm, ■■■v■syam ida■ sarvam (ISO 1): "Everything is the property of the Supreme Lord."
Sarva■ khalv ida■ brahma. These are Vedic injunctions. Yato v■ im■ni bh■t■ni j■yante: "From whom
everything has come." Janm■dy asya yata■ (SB 1.1.1). These are Vedic versions. But still, we,
because we are enemies, "No, why K■■■a shall be the proprietor? I am the proprietor. Why K■■■a
shall be God only? I have got another God. Here is another God."
So K■■■a has enemies. Arisudana. And He has to kill them. K■■■a has got two businesses:
paritr■■■ya s■dh■n■■ vin■■■ya ca du■k■tam (BG 4.8). Miscreants. They are miscreants. The
demons who challenge K■■■a, who wants to compete with K■■■a, who want to share with the
property of K■■■a, they are all enemies of K■■■a, and they should be killed. So killing business is all
right here for the enemies, not ordinarily. Then the next question is, "All right, enemies you can kill,
admitted. But how You advise me to kill my gurus?" Gur■n ahatv■. But if for K■■■a's sake, if there is
need, you have to kill your guru also. That is the philosophy. For K■■■a's sake. If K■■■a wants, then
you cannot . . . if K■■■a wants that you should kill your guru, then you have to do it. That is K■■■a
consciousness. Of course, K■■■a will not ask you to kill guru, but . . . because guru and K■■■a is the
same. Guru-k■■■a-k■p■ya (CC Madhya 19.151). We get K■■■a consciousness through the mercy
of guru and K■■■a.
So real guru is never to be killed, but the so-called guru has to be killed. The so-called, pseudo guru,
false guru, he should be killed. Just like Prahl■da Mah■r■ja. While Prahl■da Mah■r■ja . . . he was
standing. Here is . . . N■si■hadeva is killing his father. Father is guru. Sarva-devamayo guru■ (SB
11.17.27). Similarly, father is also guru, at least, official guru. Materially he is guru. So how Prahl■da
Mah■r■ja allowed N■si■ha-deva to kill his guru? He's father. Everyone knows that Hira■yaka■ipu is
father. Would you like to see that your father is being killed by some person, and you'll stand? You will
not protest? Is that your duty? No, that is not your duty. When your father is attacked, you must protest.
At least, if you are unable, you must fight. You first of all lay down your life: "How is that, my father is
being killed in my front?"
That is your duty. But Prahl■da Mah■r■ja did not protest. He could have requested—he is
devotee—"My dear Sir, Prabhu, my Lord, You can excuse my father." He did it. But he knew that, "My
father is not being killed. It is the body of the father." Later on he begged for his father in a different way.
First of all, when N■si■ha-deva was angry, He was killing the body, he knew that "The body is not my
father. The soul is my father. So let the Lord satisfy Himself by killing the body of my father; then I shall
save him."
So Prahl■da Mah■r■ja . . . N■si■hadeva offered Prahl■da Mah■r■ja, "Now you can take any kind of
benediction you like." So Prahl■da Mah■r■ja replied: "My Lord, we are materialists. I am born of a
father absolutely materialist. So I am also, because I am born of a materialist father, I am also
materialist. And You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, You are offering to give me some
benediction. I can take any kind of benediction from You. I know that. But what is the use of it? Why
shall I ask You for any benediction? I have seen my father."
"Materially, he was so powerful that even the demigods, Indra, Candra, Varu■a, they were threatened
by his red eyes. And he gained over control over the universe. He was so powerful. And riches, wealth,
power, reputation, everything complete. But You have finished it in one second. So why You are
offering me such benediction? What shall I do with them? If I take that benediction from You and I
become puffed up and do everything wrong against You, then You can finish it within a second. So
kindly do not offer me such benediction, such material opulence. Better give me benediction to be
engaged in the service of Your servant. I want this benediction. Let me be benedicted by You that I may
be engaged in the service of Your servant, not directly Your servant."
Then, after many prayers, after pacifying the Lord . . . He was very angry. Then when He is . . . He was
little pacified, he asked, "My dear Lord, I can ask You one, another benediction: that my father was
very, very staunch enemy of You. That was the cause of his death. Now I ask You, kindly excuse him
and give him liberation." This is Vai■■ava son. He did not ask anything for himself. And although he
knew that his father was the greatest enemy, still, he is asking his benediction, "This poor fellow may be
liberated." So Lord N■si■ha-deva guaranteed, said: "My dear Prahl■da, not only your father, but your
father's father, his father, up to fourteen generations, all are liberated because you are born in this
family."
So anyone who has become a Vai■■ava, a devotee of the Lord, he is giving the greatest service to the
family. Because in relationship with him, his father, mother, anyone, they will be liberated. Just like we
have got experience: if a person dies in the fight immaturely, his family is taken care of by the
government. Similarly, to become a devotee is the greatest qualification. He has got everything. Yatra
yoge■varo hari■ yatra dhanur-dhara■ p■rtha■ (BG 18.78). When there is K■■■a and when there is
devotee, all victory, all glories are there. That is guaranteed.
So gur■n ahatv■. A devotee of K■■■a, if need be, if he's unqualified guru . . . unqualified guru means
who does not know how to guide the disciple. Guru's duty is to guide. So such kind of guru can be at
least rejected. That is J■va Gosv■m■'s . . . k■rya-k■ryam aj■nata■. A guru who does not know what
to do and what not to do, but I mistake, by mistakenly I have accepted somebody as guru, he can be
rejected. By rejecting him, you can accept a actual bona fide guru. So guru is not killed, but he can be
rejected. That is the injunction of the ■■stra. So Bh■■madeva or Dro■■c■rya, certainly they were
gurus, but K■■■a indirectly giving indication to Arjuna that, "Although they are in the position of guru,
you can reject them." K■rya-k■ryam aj■nata■. "They do not know factually."
This Bh■■madeva, he materially considered his position. He knew everything from the beginning, that
the P■■■avas, they were parentless, fatherless children, and he raised them from the very beginning.
Not only that; he was so much affectionate to the P■■■avas that he was thinking, when they were sent
to forest, banished, at that time Bh■■madeva was crying that, "These five boys, they are so pure, so
honest, and not only pure and honest, so powerful warriors, Arjuna and Bh■ma. And this Draupad■ is
practically directly the goddess of fortune. And they have got their friend, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, K■■■a. And they are suffering?" He cried. He was such affectionate. Therefore Arjuna is
considering, "How can I kill Bh■■ma?"
But duty is so strong. K■■■a is advising, "Yes, he must be killed because he has gone . . . he has
gone to the other side. He has forgotten his duty. He should have joined you. Therefore he is no more
in the position of guru. You must kill him. He has wrongly joined the other party. Therefore there is no
harm, killing him. Similarly Dro■■c■rya. Similarly Dro■■c■rya. I know they are great personalities,
they have got great affection. But only on material consideration they have gone there."
What is that material consideration? Bh■■ma thought that, "I am maintained by the money of
Duryodhana. Duryodhana is maintaining me. Now he is in danger. If I go to the other side, then I should
be ungrateful. He has maintained me so long. And if I, in the time of danger, when there is fighting, if I
go to the other side, that will be . . ." He thought like this. He did not think that "Duryodhana may be
maintaining, but he has usurped the property of the P■■■avas." But it is his greatness. He knew that
Arjuna will never be killed, because K■■■a is there. "So from material point of view, I must be grateful
to Duryodhana." The same position was for Dro■■c■rya. They were maintained.
Therefore Caitanya Mah■prabhu has said that vi■ay■ra anna kh■ile mal■na haya mana (CC Antya
6.278): such great personalities became darkened because they took money from them, anna. If I am
provided by somebody who is too much materialist, then that will affect me. I will become also
materialist. I will also become materialist. So Caitanya Mah■prabhu has warned that, "Those who are
vi■ay■, those who are not devotees, do not accept anything from them, because it will," I mean to say,
"make your mind unclean."
So therefore a br■hma■a and Vai■■ava, they do not accept directly money. They accept bhik■■.
Bhik■■. Bhik■■ you can . . . just like here it is said bhaik■yam. ■reyo bhoktu■ bhaik■yam ap■ha
loke (BG 2.5). When you ask somebody . . . still, bhik■■ is also sometimes prohibited from a person
who is too much materialist. But bhik■■ is allowed for sanny■s■s, for br■hma■a.
So therefore Arjuna is speaking that, "Instead of killing such great gurus, who are so great
personalities, mah■nubh■v■n . . ." So bhaik■yam. For a k■atriya . . . a br■hma■a, a sanny■s■ can
beg, can beg alms, but not a k■atriya, not a vai■ya. That is not allowed. So he was a k■atriya, Arjuna.
So he says: "Better I shall take the profession of a br■hma■a and beg from door to door instead of
enjoy the kingdom by killing my guru." That was his proposal.
So on the whole, Arjuna is illusioned—illusioned in the sense that he is forgetting his duty. He is a
k■atriya, his duty is to fight; never mind the opposite party, even he is son, a k■atriya will not hesitate
to kill his son even, if he is inimical. Similarly, a son, if the father is inimical, he would not hesitate to kill
his father. This is the stringent duty of the k■atriyas; no consideration.
A k■atriya cannot consider like that. Therefore K■■■a said, klaibyam: "You don't be coward. Why you
are becoming coward?" These topics are going on. Later on, K■■■a will give him real spiritual
instruction. This is . . . ordinary talks are going on between the friend and the friend.
That's all right. Thank you. (end)
