Pradyumna: O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo
bhagavate v■sudev■ya. (devotees repeat) (leads chanting of verse)
yotsyam■n■n—those who will be fighting; avek■e—let me see; aham—I; ye—who; ete—those;
atra—here; sam■gat■■—assembled; dh■rtar■■■rasya—the son of Dh■tar■■■ra;
durbuddhe■—evil-minded; yuddhe—in the fight; priya—well; cik■r■ava■—wishing.
Translation: "Let me see those who have come here to fight, wishing to please the evil-minded son of
Dh■tar■■■ra."
Prabhup■da: Dh■rtar■■■rasya durbuddher (BG 1.23). Durbuddhi. To usurp others' property is
durbuddhi, mischievous. Why one should encroach upon others' property? That is not good. Tena
tyaktena bhuñj■th■ m■ g■dha■ kasya svid dhanam (ISO 1). This is the Vedic instruction that, "You
accept only what is given to you. Don't encroach upon others' property." This is peaceful. Everything
belongs to K■■■a, so whatever K■■■a gives you as pras■dam, as His favor, you accept it and be
satisfied. This is the basic principle of peace in the world. But because people are not educated in that
way, everyone is wanting more and more and more and more. There is no satisfaction. So that is
durbuddhi.
The Vedic culture is that, "You be satisfied with your position." There is no question of starving in any
position of life. People are trying to make economic development, but according to ■■stra, it is not
possible to develop your economic position simply by endeavor. You are destined to have some portion
mixed up with happiness and distress. That is the nature. Dharm■rtha-k■ma-mok■a (SB 4.8.41).
These are four principles of human activities. First beginning is dharma. dharma means to abide by the
orders of the Supreme. That is dharma.
So people do not know who is the Supreme and what is His order. So what kind of religion? They take
dharma as religion, faith, a superfluous faith only. But that is not dharma, religion. dharma means to
abide by the orders of the Supreme. dharma■ tu s■k■■d bhagavat-pra■■tam (SB 6.3.19). That is the
meaning of dharma: obedience to God. There is no conception of God, and what to speak of
obedience. But this is the simple meaning of religion: obedience to God. That's all, three words. God is
the supreme proprietor, God is the maintainer: bhokt■ra■ yajña-tapas■■ sarva-loka-mahe■varam
(BG 5.29).
Therefore we are maintained, we are predominated, we are servant, we should remain obedient to
God. This is religion. Where is the difficulty? Unfortunately, they do not know what is God, what is His
command, what is religion. They do not know. They manufacture. And because they do not know the
simple process, they are called durbuddhi: not very nicely intelligent. A rascal, in other words.
In the Bhagavad-g■t■ it is plainly said m■■ha. M■■ha means asses, rascal. He does not know his
own interest. He is called m■■ha, ass. Just like ass, ass is whole day working with tons of cloth on his
back, but he does not . . . not a piece of cloth belongs to him. This is ass. And he is working so hard
only for a morsel of grass, which is available everywhere. But he is thinking that "This gentleman,
washerman, is giving me food." This is ass.
Such food can be available anywhere and everywhere, but he is thinking like that and working so hard.
So karm■s are like that. He will eat two c■p■■i or four c■p■■is, but he is working day and night. If
you want to see him, he will say: "Oh, I have no time." He does not think at any time that, "I am
interested to eat four c■p■■is, which can be very easily available. So why I am so working so hard?"
But that sense does not come. He is working, working, working, "More money, more money, more
money, more money, more money." The Bh■gavata says: "No, no. This is not your business." The four
c■p■■is is already destined to you—you will get, any circumstances. You don't waste your time simply
under some false impression of economic development. Don't waste your time. You cannot get more,
you cannot get less. That is already there. So you utilize your time for understanding K■■■a. That is
your business. People will not accept it, "Oh, this is waste of time. Attending the class of
Bhagavad-g■t■, this is waste of time. By this time I could have earned hundreds of dollars." That is
their business. That is called durbuddhi, durbuddhi, not very intelligent. All m■■ha, asses.
Real intelligent person is he who is satisfied what K■■■a has given him, "If K■■■a wants, He will give
me more. Let me become K■■■a conscious. Let me study about K■■■a. Let me chant about
K■■■a. Let me hear about K■■■a. Let me see with my eyes K■■■a, the Deity K■■■a. Let me
engage my hands in worshiping K■■■a, in cleansing the temple, my hands. Let my legs be engaged in
going to the temple." In this way all our senses should be engaged in the service of K■■■a. That is our
real business. Tasyaiva heto■ prayateta kovido na labhyate yad bhramat■m upary adha■ (SB 1.5.18).
Tasyaiva heto■: "For that purpose only." Which purpose? Which we could not achieve after wandering
the whole universe, up and down.
The living entity is wandering, by transmigration from one body to another, up and down. Sometimes he
is becoming Brahm■ even. Brahm■, Indra, Candra, he can become. One can become. By pious
activities, you can be raised to the position of Brahm■, Indra, Candra, demigods, big, big demigods.
And by impious activities you can go down to become the worm of a stool. This is going on. This is
called bhramat■m upary adha■. Upari adha■. Adha■ means down, and upari means up. So ■rdhva■
gacchanti sattva-sth■■ (BG 14.18). Who are going to up, upper planetary system? Sattva-sth■■:
those who are qualified br■hma■as, strictly following the principles, satya ■amo dama tittiska ■rjava
eva ca jñ■na■ vijñ■nam ■stikya■ brahma-karma svabh■va-jam (BG 18.42).
If you follow these principles—controlling the senses, truthful, clean, full of knowledge, believing in the
■■stra and God, and vijñ■nam, practical application of knowledge in life, vijñ■nam . . . simply to know
is useless. You must practically apply in life. That is called vijñ■nam. Practical examination. Those who
are science students, in B.Sc., they have to give . . . pass theoretical knowledge and practical
knowledge also. Simply theoretical knowledge, "So much hydrogen, oxygen makes water," that is
theoretical. But when you mix up hydrogen, oxygen gas, and actually prepare water, that is called
practical. So that is science. Science means simply theoretical knowledge is not sufficient. Observation
and experiment, experimental knowledge. That is called vijñ■nam.
So by practical knowledge you should be well acquainted with God. That is br■hma■a's business. So
sattva-sth■■, those who are strictly following the brahminical principles, they will be situated in upper
planetary system. ■rdhva■ gacchanti sattva-sth■■ (BG 14.18). But a Vai■■ava is above these.
Mad-y■jino y■nti m■m (BG 9.25). Those who are following these principles with an aim for higher
planetary system, they can go, elevated. Similarly, those who are trying to go back to home, back to
K■■■a, they can also go. It is not very . . .
This process, our K■■■a consciousness movement, is to help people to go back to home, back to
K■■■a. It is not very difficult. Why it is difficult? K■■■a says, janma karma me divya■ yo j■n■ti
tattvata■ (BG 4.9). Try to understand K■■■a in truth, not vaguely. K■■■a is the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. We think of God. So why don't you accept K■■■a? He says and ■■stra says, the
■c■rya says, Vy■sadeva says, N■rada says, your Guru Mah■r■ja says. Why not accept? Why
rascaldom? Why you are searching after any other God? Here is God. Name, address, activities,
everything is there, authorized statement of the Vedas. So is there any difficulty to understand K■■■a?
But these rascal will not take it.
Persistent. "Oh, why K■■■a can be accepted? I have got a God, manufactured." This is misfortune.
Durbhaga, durbuddhi, miscreant, rascal. That is stated in the Bhagavad-g■t■: na m■■ du■k■tino
m■■h■■ prapadyante nar■dham■■ (BG 7.15). These are the qualification of persons who do not
surrender to K■■■a: miscreants, mischievous, sinful, m■■ha, rascal, asses, nar■dhama, lowest of
the mankind. These are the qualification. So they are all durbuddhi.
Human life is meant . . . this is an opportunity to understand K■■■a.
This is Narottama d■sa ■h■kura's song. Anyone who is not trying to understand K■■■a . . . not even
trying, what to speak of worshiping Him, giving Him service. And K■■■a says simply by trying to know
Him, one becomes liberated. Simply by trying; not perfectly. Even imperfectly. Because he is
endeavoring to understand K■■■a, that very activity will make him liberated. That very activity. It is not
possible to understand K■■■a. He is so great, unlimited. How we can understand K■■■a? K■■■a
cannot understand Himself. Or Ananta cannot understand.
So . . . actually, that is the fact. We cannot understand K■■■a. But still, whatever K■■■a says about
Himself in the Bhagavad-g■t■, if we accept so much, then we immediately become fit for going back to
Godhead, back to home. Simply. Janma karma me divya■ yo j■n■ti tattvata■ (BG 4.9). Tattvata■.
Tattvata■ means in truth. The tattvata■ cannot understand. Even siddhas, those who are perfect . . .
Nobody can understand, even if he is siddha, perfect. Perfect means not spiritually perfect; means
materially perfect. Or even spiritually, partially perfect. Brahma-jñ■n■, they are partially perfect.
Param■tm■-jñ■n■, yog■s, they are also partially perfect. Not completely perfect. Completely perfect
is the devotees. Only devotees, they are completely perfect. Others, the jñ■n■s and yog■s and
karm■s . . .
Karm■s are . . . they are rascals. Jñ■n■s, they are partially perfect because they can understand the
eternity portion of the Supreme Lord, brahma-jñ■na. That is eternity portion. And param■tm■-jñ■na is
the cid-a■■a, knowledge, or personally seeing God as the four-handed Vi■■u. So that is also perfect
knowledge, er, imperfect knowledge. That when He comes to know Bhagav■n, ■■vara■ parama■
k■■■a■ sac-cid-■nanda-vigraha■ (Bs. 5.1), then there is perfect knowledge. ■nanda.
Because when one comes to the understanding of personal God, there is ■nanda. In other features,
there is no ■nanda. There is eternity, there is knowledge, but there is no ■nanda. ■nandamayo
'bhy■s■t (Ved■nta-s■tra 1.1.12). That is the Ved■nta-s■tra. One is by nature ■nandamaya. We are
searching after ■nanda, bliss, but we do not know where to get bliss. We are trying to get bliss in this
material world by eating meat, eating wine, drinking wine, by sex. They are trying to get ■nanda. That
is not ■nanda. ■nanda is . . . what is saty■nanda.
These ■nandas, these pleasures—flickering, for few minutes, for few hours—that is not ■nanda.
■nanda means saty■nanda, real ■nanda. Real ■nanda. What is that real ■nanda? Brahma-sukha.
That ■nanda is in exchange with the Supreme Brahman. Brahma-saukhyam anantam (SB 5.5.1). That
is anantam, unlimited ■nanda. Therefore ramante yogina■ anante (CC Madhya 9.29).
Therefore those who are actually yog■s, bhakti-yog■s—there are different types of yoga—so they
ramante, they enjoy, ramante yogina■ anante, along with the ananta, Unlimited. K■■■a is unlimited.
When you join with K■■■a in His r■sa dance as gop■s, or as cowherds boy, play with Him, or
become His father and mother, Ya■od■, Nanda Mah■r■ja, Ya■od■-r■■■, or His . . . become
servant, or even become like water, Yamun■, or land in V■nd■vana and trees or fruits or flowers, any
way, or cows and calves . . .
Join with K■■■a. Then you get ■nanda, real ■nanda. ■nandamayo 'bhy■s■t (Ved■nta-s■tra
1.1.12). Sac-cid-■nanda-vigraha (Bs. 5.1). That is the description in all Bh■gavatam, how the
K■■■a's associates are enjoying life. K■ta-pu■ya-puñj■■ (SB 10.12.11). ■ukadeva Gosv■m■ said:
"These boys who are playing with K■■■a, oh, they are not ordinary boys." K■ta-pu■ya-puñj■■: "They
have amassed the effects of pious activities for millions and trillions of births. Now they have come to
play with K■■■a."
So that opportunity is there in bhakti-yoga. K■■■a is anxious to take you back. Why you are wasting
time, economic development? What economic development you'll do? You cannot get more than what
is destined to you. That is not possible. Then everyone would have been big man, big, educated, very
beautiful. Econ . . . pious activities, the effects of pious activity, is to get nice opulence,
janmai■varya-■ruta-■r■ (SB 1.8.26): birth in very high family, janma; ai■varya, opulence, riches;
education; ■r■ . . . ■ruta, ■ruta means education, highly learned. These things are effects of pious
activities. You get nice family, you take your birth in nice family, rich family, ai■varya, you get good
education, you become very beautiful. These are the effects of pious activities. Similarly, the effects of
impious activities, the opposite.
But they are all material. They are destined. Whatever you have got by pious or impious activities, that
you cannot change. It is not possible. But you can change your position, this material position, by
K■■■a consciousness. That you can change. Other things you cannot change. If you are white, you
cannot become black, or if you are black, you cannot become white. That is not possible. But you can
become first-class K■■■a conscious person. Either you are black or white, it doesn't matter. This is
K■■■a consciousness.
Therefore our endeavor should be how to become K■■■a conscious. Other things we cannot change.
This is not possible. Sarvatra.
K■lena, by time, whatever you are destined you will get. Don't bother about so-called economic
development. So far food is concerned, K■■■a is supplying, eko bah■n■■ yo vidadh■ti k■m■n,
even cats and dogs and ants. Why not you? There is no need of bothering K■■■a, "God, give us our
daily bread." He will give you. Don't bother. Try to become very faithful servant of God, "Oh, God has
given so many things. So let me give my energy to serve K■■■a." This is required.
This is K■■■a consciousness, "I have taken so much, life after life, from K■■■a. Now this life let me
dedicate to K■■■a." This is K■■■a consciousness. "This life I will not let it go uselessly like cats and
dogs. Let me utilize it for K■■■a consciousness." This is K■■■a consciousness.
Thank you very much. Hare K■■■a.
Devotees: Jaya . . . (cut) (end)
