Prabhup■da:
Madhus■dana. K■■■a is described here as Madhus■dana, the killer of the demon Madhu.
Madhu-kai■abha-ari. So Arjuna was attacked by a demon of forgetting his duty, being too much
afflicted by bodily relationship. This is our position. In this material world, we are so much attached to
this bodily relationship that it is to be considered just like we are ghostly haunted. In a poetry,
Prema-vivarta, it is said that:
M■y■-grasta j■va. M■y■-grasta. M■y■ means illusion, hallucination.
So we are, in this material world, we are all illusioned. Illusioned means accepting something as fact
which is not. Something . . . just like in dream we see sometimes I am attacked with a tiger; my head is
being cut off. So many things. So actually there is no tiger, my head is not being cut off, but still, I am
crying—"Oh, here is a tiger, here is a tiger!" So our attachment for this world is like that. It is illusion. I
am thinking that "Without me, everything will be spoiled. My presence is required," and so on, so on.
Just like sometimes our political leaders. Each and every one of them thinks that without him, the whole
situation will be spoiled. Even Mahatma Gandhi, he was so attached that he would not retire from
political life—unless he was killed. The attachment was so strong. But after passing away of Mahatma
Gandhi or Jawaharlal Nehru or so many big, big leaders, the world is going on. There is a Bengali
proverb that "When the king dies, it does not mean the kingdom stops." The kingdom goes on. But
when, so long the leader or the person in charge remains there, he thinks that "Without me, everything
will be spoiled." This is called m■y■. This is called illusion.
According to Vedic system, therefore, there is forced renunciation. Nobody wants to retire from family
life, but the Vedic injunction is that after one has passed fifty years, he must leave his family life.
Pañc■■ordhva■ vana■ vrajet. In the beginning, as a student life, he's trained up, brahmac■r■,
undergoing severe austerities, penances, and taking instruction from the spiritual master about the
temporary existence of this material world. In this way, he's trained up very nicely. And even after
training, if he appears to be attached to this material world, he's allowed to go home and marry. And
some of the brahmac■r■s are allowed to remain nai■■hika-brahmac■r■, without going home and
accepting a wife.
But one who cannot, he's allowed to accept wife and become a householder and remain there for
twenty-five years. Because generally, the brahmac■r■ was going home at the age of twenty-four
years, twenty-five years. So after marriage, he may get a child. So living there for twenty-five years
means the child is grown up.
Then the husband and wife takes leave—not leaving for good, but v■naprastha, traveling in
pilgrimages like V■nd■vana, Pray■ga. That was the system. And after two months, again he comes
back and remains home for another two months. Again goes out. In this way, the whole process is how
to give up attachment from this family life, from this world. And when he's trained up fully, he takes
sanny■sa. That is our Vedic system.
So the attachment of this material world is very strong. That is stated in the ■r■mad-Bh■gavatam by
■■abhadeva: Pu■sa■ striy■ mithun■-bh■vam etat (SB 5.5.8). This whole material world is an
attachment of male and female. Pu■sa■ striy■ mithun■-bh■vam, sex impulse, attachment. Tayor
mitho h■daya-granthim ■hu■. And when they are married, when they are united, then it becomes a
hard knot in the heart.
Ato g■ha-k■etra-sut■pta-vittair janasya moho 'yam aha■ mamet. Then gradually, after being united,
one becomes attached to g■ha, home, apartment, k■etra. Formerly there was no industry, so
everyone must have some land to produce food. G■ha-k■etra, suta, then children; ■pta, friends; vitta,
then money, because without money, nothing can be maintained.
Ata■ g■ha-k■etra-sut■pta-vittair janasya moha■. He becomes more and more illusioned. And aha■
mameti (SB 5.5.8): "Oh, this is my country. This is my family. This is my house. This is my children," so
on, so on. Mama, "Mine." And "I am this person. I am this body." This is illusion.
So Arjuna appeared to be illusioned, that "How I shall fight with my brothers and grandfather on the
other side?" He became so much illusioned . . . ta■ tath■ k■pay■vi■■am (BG 2.1). He became
illusioned not unnecessarily. He was very much compassionate, compassionate with his family
members. K■pay■vi■■am, a■ru-p■r■■kulek■a■am (BG 2.1). And he was crying. There was tears
in his eyes. Vi■■dantam ida■ v■kyam. And he was lamenting in this way: "How shall I fight?"
So K■■■a then began to speak. K■■■a saw that, "My friend, Arjuna, has become too much
illusioned." So He wanted to kill the demon of illusion. Therefore He's mentioned herein as
Madhus■dana. K■■■a comes. He has got two business: paritr■■■ya s■dh■n■■ vin■■■ya ca
du■k■t■m (BG 4.8). Side by side, giving protection to His devotees, s■dhu . . .
S■dhu means devotee. Devotee of K■■■a is mentioned in the Bhagavad-g■t■ as s■dhu. Api cet
su-dur■c■ro bhajate m■m ananya-bh■k, s■dhur eva sa mantavya■ (BG 9.30). One who is strictly a
pure devotee of K■■■a, he is mentioned as s■dhu.
S■dhur eva sa mantavya■ samyag vyavasito hi sa■. He is first-class s■dhu. Even if he's a g■hastha,
it doesn't matter. Generally, we understand s■dhu means with saffron cloth. No. S■dhu's qualification
is that he must be a pure devotee of K■■■a. S■dhava■ s■dhu-bh■■a■a■. S■dhava■
s■dhu-bh■■a■a■.
So now K■■■a speaks: ■r■ bhagav■n uv■ca. Bhagav■n. This Bhagav■n means one who is full with
six kinds of opulences. He's called Bhagav■n.
Bhaga. Bhagav■n and K■■■a. K■■■a means all-attractive. Bhagav■n ■r■ K■■■a. K■■■as tu
bhagav■n svayam (SB 1.3.28). There are other great personalities. Lord ■iva is also sometimes
described as Bhagav■n. Similarly, Lord Brahm■, N■rada, others are also sometimes described as
Bhagav■n. But real Bhagav■n means K■■■a. They are Bhagav■n partially.
All these things have been very much carefully analyzed by ■r■la R■pa Gosv■m■. He has analyzed
in the Bhakti-ras■m■ta-sindhu, which we have translated into English, Nectar of Devotion, he has
analyzed that K■■■a is cent percent Bhagav■n. And N■r■ya■a is ninety-four percent Bhagav■n.
And Lord ■iva is eighty-four percent Bhagav■n.
And all other living entities, all living entities, we are, we are minutely, seventy-eight percent Bhagav■n.
That means when you come to the perfection of life, when you are actually in the spiritual stage, then
you are . . . you have got the qualities of Bhagav■n in minute quantity, but not all the qualities—eighty,
seventy-eight percent. These have been very nicely analyzed in Bhakti-ras■m■ta-sindhu.
And the ■■stra says also: k■■■as tu bhagav■n svayam. In the ■r■mad-Bh■gavatam there is a list of
all the incarnations, that "Such-and-such incarnation appears for such-and-such particular activities." In
that incarnation list there is name of Lord R■macandra also, Lord Buddha also. Buddha's name is also
there. But in the conclusive portion it is declared there, ete c■■■a-kal■■ pu■sa■ k■■■as tu
bhagav■n svayam (SB 1.3.28).
In that list, the name of Lord K■■■a, Lord Balar■ma is there also. But the conclusion is given by
Vy■sadeva that, "Except K■■■a, all others, they are plenary expansion of K■■■a or part of plenary
expansion of K■■■a." A■■a-kal■■. A■■a means direct expansion. And kal■■ means expansion of
the . . . secondary expansion. So it is concluded there that ete c■■■a-kal■■ pu■sa■. All these
incarnations, they are either a■■a or kal■■. But K■■■a, the name K■■■a, k■■■as tu bhagav■n
svayam: He's the original Personality of Godhead, K■■■a.
The same thing here Vy■sadeva describes: ■r■ bhagav■n uv■ca. He's not ordinary person.
Bhagav■n speaking. Bhagav■n means . . . what is Bhagav■n? Ai■varya. Ai■varya means riches.
Nobody can be richer than Bhagav■n. We have got our ideas of richness. I may be rich, but you are
richer than me, somebody is richer than you, somebody is richer than another, another, another.
You go, make proceed. When you find out the final richest person, that is Bhagav■n. Ai■varyasya
sama . . . samagrasya. All riches. Not that partial. One may have one thousand, another may have one
lakh, one may have one crore, but nobody can say that "I have got all the monies." No. That is not
possible. But Bhagav■n has all the monies.
Ai■varyasya samagrasya v■ryasya, similarly, strength, bodily strength or power. Ai■varyasya
samagrasya v■ryasya ya■asa■, and similarly, reputation. We are also reputed. But nobody can be
reputed than K■■■a. Just like five thousand years ago He spoke this Bhagavad-g■t■, and He's so
reputed that K■■■a spoke Bhagavad-g■t■ and still it is running on—not only in India, but we are
traveling all over the world, there are so many editions of Bhagavad-g■t■. So He's so reputed. So
ai■varyasya samagrasya v■ryasya ya■asa■ ■riya■. And beautiful, the most beautiful, K■■■a. Most
attractive.
Ya■asa■ ■ri . . . jñ■na, knowledge. Now, K■■■a's knowledge there is no limit, still the knowledge,
the book of knowledge which He has given, this Bhagavad-g■t■, there is no comparison. There is no
second book in the whole world which contains so full of knowledge. So jñ■na.
And vair■gya also. In spite of all the property of K■■■a, K■■■a doesn't care for this material world.
He is busy in the spiritual world. R■dh■-m■dhava kuñja-bih■r■. He's busy in V■nd■vana. He has
many servants. Just big man has got many secretaries, servants, they look after, similarly, in this
material world, His representatives—Brahm■, Vi■■u, Mahe■vara—they are managing the affairs of
this whole universe.
But He's enjoying in V■nd■vana. Jaya r■dh■-m■dhava kuñja-bih■r■. He has no concern. He doesn't
care what is happening here. But it, it does not mean that He doesn't care, but He has no anxiety how
the things are being managed.
When it is mismanaged, then sometimes K■■■a comes in His V■sudeva form. Not the original
K■■■a. Original K■■■a never leaves V■nd■vana. Padam eka■ na gacchati. He's always in His
abode.
He is very much adhered to His cows. Surabh■r abhip■layantam. And He's surrounded by hundreds
and thousands of goddess of fortune, these gop■s. He is surrounded.
Lak■m■-sahasra-■ata-sambhrama-sevyam■nam (Bs. 5.29). We are . . . we are praying goddess of
fortune to have some favor, but in the spiritual world, K■■■a is served by hundreds and thousands of
goddess of fortune. This is K■■■a's position.
So I do not know why foolish people, they do not understand what is God. Everything is there. And He
comes also, personally. Not only the God's name, address, activities and everything is there, but He
comes personally also. He proves K■■■a. He proved that He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
When K■■■a was present, He proved all these things. Ai■varyasya samagrasya v■ryasya ya■asa■
■riya■. He proved.
He had sixteen thousand wives, and each wife, a big palatial building of marble, bedecked with jewels
and gardens with p■rij■ta flowers. These are description. Nobody can maintain sixteen thousand wives
in sixteen thousand palaces. Not only that, not that if He enters in one palace, He lives with one wife,
the other wives are vacant. No. He expanded Himself into sixteen thousand forms. And with each wife
He was living comfortably. Each wife had ten children, and those children also had each ten children,
grandsons. In this way, K■■■a's family was more than one crore, Yadu-va■■a.
So if you study from material point of view, when K■■■a was present, He proved that He's Bhagav■n.
And Bhagav■n means not a big beard and meditation. K■■■a never became Bhagav■n by
meditation. He was not a manufactured God. He's God always. He's not manufactured.
When He was on the lap of His Mother Ya■od■, He was God. The P■tan■ came to kill Him, but
K■■■a killed him (her). In this way, if we read the life of K■■■a, He's proved Bhagav■n. And not only
He proved Himself, but all others, great authorities, accepted Him Bhagav■n.
There are four Vai■■ava ■c■ryas in the recent years, and one M■y■v■da ■c■rya, ■a■kar■c■rya.
■a■kar■c■rya also, although he is inclined to the impersonal feature of the Lord, but he accepted
K■■■a: sa bhagav■n svaya■ k■■■a■. He accepted, "K■■■a is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, N■r■ya■a."
N■r■ya■a■ avyakt■t. So other Vai■■ava ■c■ryas—R■m■nuj■c■rya, Madhv■c■rya, Vi■■u
Sv■m■, Nimb■rka, lately Lord Caitanya—all of them accepted K■■■a as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. And Arjuna, he also, when he heard from Him Bhagavad-g■t■, he accepted Him as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Para■ brahma para■ dh■ma pavitra■ parama■ bhav■n, puru■a■
■■■vatam (BG 10.12).
So K■■■a is accepted universally the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Why people are making
research, "Where is God?" I do not know. Why they are uselessly taking so much hard labor to search
out God? Here is God, K■■■a. Bhagav■n uv■ca. So there is no reason, there is no, I mean to say,
chance of not accepting K■■■a as the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
K■■■a personally says that matta■ paratara■ n■nyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya (BG 7.7): "There is no
more superior element above Me." Aha■ sarvasya prabhava■ (BG 10.8). "I am the origin of
everything." Aham ■dir hi dev■n■m (BG 10.2). Then . . . there are so many statements, "K■■■a is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead." So anyone who is actually serious about understanding about the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, there is no difficulty.
But because we are obstinate, because we are sinful, because we are lowest of the mankind, because
our knowledge has been taken away by m■y■, and because we are atheist, we do not accept K■■■a
as the Supreme Personality. Otherwise, there is no reason. K■■■a therefore describes: na m■■
du■k■tino m■■h■■ prapadyante nar■dham■■ (BG 7.15). Unless one is du■k■tina, always
miscreants, full of sinful life, he cannot deny K■■■a as the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
So our this K■■■a consciousness movement is preaching all over the world that, "You are all
advanced in civilization and advanced in scientific knowledge and advanced in everything, but you are
missing one thing—God, K■■■a. So here is God. Here is K■■■a. You try to understand K■■■a and
be K■■■a conscious and make your life successful." That is our propaganda.
Thank you very much. Hare K■■■a. (break)
Indian man: May I ask you one question?
Prabhup■da: Yes.
Indian man: When there is bhajana singing . . .
Prabhup■da: Yes.
Indian man: . . . which I can understand the words . . .
Prabhup■da: Hare K■■■a?
Indian man: Or any bhajana of God. Then, you see, I understand language and everything. You see, if
it is just like M■r■bhai and crying, tear comes from my face, and laughing, very instant laughing, laugh
. . .
Prabhup■da: Yes.
Indian man: And there is no other progress.
Prabhup■da: No, that is a■■a-s■ttvika-vik■ra (CC Antya 14.99).
Indian man: S■ttvika-vik■ra.
Prabhup■da: Yes, that is called vik■ra, transformation of spiritual platform. Yes.
Indian man: But still there is something more, something more.
Prabhup■da: No, that is the . . . when one cries, transformed, that means he's realizing K■■■a.
Indian man: Yes, yes . . .
Prabhup■da: He's realizing like that. That is realization. Caitanya Mah■prabhu also used to do that.
That is highest stage, mah■-bh■va.
Indian man: Mah■-bh■va, yes . . .
Prabhup■da: Yes.
Indian man: So then I go in bhajana, you see, wash out everything; I feel myself that there is only soul,
no body. And then you see a man who sings or who are present, you see, they are also not their body.
Simply soul.
Prabhup■da: Yes, forget all material . . . yes.
Indian man: All these things. Then there is only soul.
Prabhup■da: Yes, that is perfectional, liberated stage.
Indian man: Liberated stage.
Prabhup■da: Yes.
Indian man: And have you explained anything about this in your G■t■, in fifteen . . . you see? These
three . . .?
Prabhup■da: G■t■ is just to understand what is God. And then, when you are actually engaged in
God's service, these things come. That is higher stage. G■t■ is the A-B-C-D of understanding God.
Indian man: So it will give you some more reflection. You see . . .
Prabhup■da: Yes. But if we accept the A-B-C-D, then we come to literature. Then we pass M.A.
examination. Yes. So G■t■ is the preliminary step, first step of understanding God.
Indian man: I am reading G■t■ from my childhood. I like it.
Prabhup■da: Very good.
Indian man: Yes. So I think your G■t■ will give me some more reflection.
Prabhup■da: Yes. I am explaining as it is. I am not interpreting. That is the . . . so it is being accepted.
Indian man: So I should read it.
Prabhup■da: Thank you.
Indian man: That's the inclination, that I should read the books.
Prabhup■da: (laughing) Very good.
Indian man: Very good.
Devotee: Hare K■■■a!
Prabhup■da: Jaya.
(pause) Yes, let us discuss. (break)
Indian man (2): . . . the P■■■avas. So if we do our work so perfect, we can't do it. Otherwise, we . . . so
then I am an imperfect devotee. But the question, you see, I was wondering . . . (indistinct) . . . all the
worldly duties sincerely and honestly to our capacity, pride is necessary or inevitable. "Oh, I'm a
br■hmin. I'm really worshiping God." But pride is necessary that we must do in our own hand . . .
(indistinct)
Prabhup■da: Yes. If your life is so made that in every step you are feeling presence of K■■■a, then it
is K■■■a consciousness. That is the first-class yoga, as it is confirmed by K■■■a:
Just like these boys, they are being trained up to think of K■■■a twenty-four hours. K■rtan■ya■ sad■
hari■ (CC Adi 17.31). They are . . . just like we have constructed this pandal. Our business is to preach
K■■■a. So the energy employed for constructing this temple, that is also K■■■a, that energy.
Somebody is doing . . . anything . . .
Nirbandha■ k■■■a-sambandhe yukta■ vair■gyam ucyate. If our activities are always dovetailed for
K■■■a's satisfaction, that is called vair■gya. Vair■gya. A man is engaged in business. That's all right.
But if the fruit of that business is made, is meant for K■■■a, then sva-karma■■ tam abhyarcya (BG
18.46). That is sva-karma■■.
Generally, we work for our sense gratification: "I have got this money. I must use for my sense
gratification or for my relative's sense gratification or for my country's sense gratification, for my
society's sense gratification." So this is materialism. But when the same thing is turned for K■■■a's
sense gratification, that is spiritual.
That is the difference between prema and k■ma. K■ma. It has been very simplified by Kavir■ja
K■■■ad■sa Gosv■m■ in his Caitanya-carit■m■ta: ■tmendriya-pr■ti-v■ñch■ karanam 'k■ma' (CC
Adi 4.165). ■tmendriya-pr■ti. If you want to satisfy your senses, that is called k■ma, lust.
K■■■endriya-pr■ti-v■ñch■ dhare 'prema' n■ma. The same thing, when you try to satisfy the senses
of K■■■a, that is called prema.
So we have to divert the activities for K■■■a. That is K■■■a consciousness. Just like Arjuna. Arjuna,
he, in the beginning, he denied to fight. That, our subject matter. He was crying. "No, no, I cannot fight."
So apparently Arjuna was very nice gentleman that he is forgetting his claim over the kingdom, he's
nonviolent, he's not willing to fight with his brothers, and he was crying so compassionate. So from
materialistic point of view, he was very nice. But immediately, as we'll begin tomorrow, K■■■a says
that, "Why you are thinking like an■rya?" An■rya. An■rya-ju■■am. "This kind of thinking is not for
■ryas, ■ryans. It is for the non-■ryans." He did not . . .
And the whole Bhagavad-g■t■ was spoken to Arjuna to make him ■rya. And at the end, K■■■a
inquired from Arjuna that "What is your decision?" Yathecchasi tath■ kuru (BG 18.63) But Arjuna
replied, kari■ye tad-vacanam. Kari■ye vacana■ (BG 18.73): "Now I shall fight."
And K■■■a gave him certificate, bhakto 'si priyo 'si me (BG 4.3): "You are very dear friend, and My
great devotee." Now, fighting is not very good business, killing. But sometimes, by killing, one can
become a great devotee of K■■■a. He was a warrior, fighter. His business was to fight, but he fought
for K■■■a. Then he became a devotee. That is sva-karma■■ tam abhyarcya (BG 18.46). He . . .
Arjuna, br■hmin and k■atriya.
Similarly, our, means sva-karma, gu■a-karma-vibh■ga■a■. Our, according to Vedic system, there are
four divisions: c■tur-var■ya■ may■ s■■■a■ gu■a-karma-vibh■ga■a■ (BG 4.13). Not by birth, but
by quality and actual activities. So there are br■hmins, there are k■atriyas, there are vai■yas, there
are ■■dras; there are brahmac■r■, there are g■hastha, v■naprastha, sanny■sa. So everyone should
be engaged to satisfy K■■■a. That is the whole philosophy. Sva-karma■■ tam abhyarcya (BG 18.46).
"You work as br■hmin, you work as a k■atriya, you work as a vai■ya or ■■dra. It doesn't matter."
Even K■■■a has advised that, "If you . . . even if you think that, 'I am working as a vai■ya,' it is not
very good, because sometimes I have to speak lie for business' sake. And br■hmin's business is very
nice. No." K■■■a has advised: sa-do■am api na tyajet (BG 18.48): "Even in your profession there are
so many faults, you should not give it up. You should go on."
But the result must be given to K■■■a. That is the secret. You may work as a br■hmin, as a k■atriya,
as a businessman, as an engineer, as a doctor, as a warrior, whatever you may be. It is . . . it is never
condemned. No work is condemned. Every work is dignified, provided it is meant for K■■■a. That is
K■■■a consciousness. Chant. (break) (end)
