Prabhup■da: (leads prema-dhvani)
Satsvar■pa: O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo
bhagavate v■sudev■ya. (devotees repeat)
Prabhup■da: (aside) What is that?
Devotee: . . . (indistinct)
Prabhup■da: In my room there is.
Satsvar■pa: (leads chanting of verses)
Prabhup■da: Next. Next. Next verse.
Satsvar■pa:
Prabhup■da: Next verse also.
Satsvar■pa:
Prabhup■da: Next verse.
Satsvar■pa:
Prabhup■da: Next verse also.
Satsvar■pa:
Prabhup■da: (aside) He could not find? So where he has gone? He could not find?
Satsvar■pa:
Synonyms?
Prabhup■da: No. Everyone goes to bring that flask, and everyone is lost.
Satsvar■pa: Here it is.
Prabhup■da: (to translator) In German language you can just translate this ■lokas he has uttered.
So this was a discussion between Arjuna and K■■■a in the Battlefield of Kuruk■etra. So the subject of
discussion was that although the battle was declared, Arjuna, when he actually found that, "On the
other side there are my relatives," how he could slain them? K■■■a advised that, "Everyone must
execute his prescribed duty without consideration of any personal loss or gain." According to Vedic
civilization, there are four divisions of the society. Everywhere the same divisions are there all over the
world. This is very natural. Just like we can study from our own body, there is head, there is arm, there
is belly and there is leg, similarly, in the society there must be a class of men who should be considered
as brain; another class of men should be there who will protect the society from danger; another class
of men will be expert in producing food grains and give protection to the cows and make trade; so, and
the rest class of men, namely who cannot work as brain neither can work as protector from danger, nor
they can produce food grains or give protection to the cows, they are called ■■dras—as you cannot
avoid, to make your body complete, the brain department, the arms department, the belly department
and the walking or working department.
So Arjuna belonged to the group of men who was meant for giving protection to the society. So when
he was declined to fight, Arjuna, when he was declining to fight, at that time K■■■a gave him advice
that, "It is your duty to fight." So generally killing is not good at all, but when there is enemy, aggressor,
then to kill the aggressor is not sin. So the other party in the Battlefield of Kuruk■etra, they became
aggressor to the Arjuna's party. Now, this is the set-up of the Bhagavad-g■t■. The real purpose is to
instruct Arjuna about spiritual understanding.
So spiritual understanding means first of all to know what is spirit. If you do not know what is spirit, then
where is spiritual understanding? People are too much engrossed with the body. That is called
materialism. But when you understand what is spirit and you act accordingly, that is called spiritualism.
So Arjuna was hesitating to fight with the other party because he had bodily relationship with them. So
between Arjuna and K■■■a there was discussion, but that was friendly discussion. Therefore, when
Arjuna understood that simply friendly discussion could not solve the problem, he became His disciple.
K■■■a . . . Arjuna surrendered to K■■■a, ■i■yas te 'ham ■■dhi m■■ prapannam (BG 2.7): "My
dear K■■■a, so long we are talking as friend. Now I become Your regular disciple. Kindly save me by
instruction. What I have to do?" Therefore, when this stage was arrived, K■■■a is advising Arjuna as
follows: ■r■-bhagav■n uv■ca.
Now, it is said here . . . who is saying to Arjuna? The author, or the recorder of Bhagavad-g■t■ . . .
Bhagavad-g■t■ was spoken by K■■■a. It was a discussion between K■■■a and Arjuna, and it was
recorded by Vy■sadeva, and later on it became a book, just like when we speak, it is recorded and
later on it is published as a book. Therefore in this book it is said, bhagav■n uv■ca. Vy■sadeva is the
writer. He does not say that, "I speak." He says, bhagav■n uv■ca, means "The Supreme Personality of
Godhead said."
So K■■■a is accepted by the authorities as Bhagav■n, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead. And
what is Bhagav■n? Bhagav■n means that one who is fully equipped with six opulences. "Fully
equipped with all opulences" means Bhagav■n is the richest personality. How much rich Bhagav■n, or
God, is, we can understand, that we are proud of possessing a few acres of land, and Bhagav■n
means who is the proprietor of the whole universe. Therefore He is considered the richest. Similarly, He
is considered the strongest. And similarly, He is considered the wisest. And similarly, He is the most
beautiful personality. In this way, when you find a person the richest, the most beautiful, the most wise,
the strongest—in this way, when you find, that is Bhagav■n, or God.
So when K■■■a was present on this planet He proved all these opulences possessed by Him. Take,
for example, that everyone marries, but K■■■a, being the Supreme Person, He married 16,108
women. But it is not that He remained one husband for sixteen thousand wives. He made arrangement
for providing the sixteen thousand wives in different palaces. Each palace, there is described, they
were made of first-class marble stone and furniture made of ivory, and the sitting place made of very
nice, soft cotton. In this way there is description. And the outward compound, there are many flower
trees. Not only that, He also expanded Himself into sixteen thousand expansion, personal expansion.
And He was living in that way with each and every wife. So it is not very difficult task for God. (devotees
offer obeisances as curtains open or close) God is said to be situated everywhere. So within our vision,
if He is situated in sixteen thousand homes, what is the difficulty for Him?
So here it is said, ■r■-bhagav■n uv■ca. The most powerful authority is speaking. Therefore, whatever
He says, it is to be taken as truth. In our this conditional life, just like we are living under material
condition, we have got four defects—we commit mistake, we are illusioned, and we want to cheat also,
and our senses are imperfect. So knowledge received from a person who is infected with four kinds of
deficiencies is not perfect. So when you receive knowledge from a person who is transcendental to all
these four kinds of defects, that is perfect knowledge. Modern scientists, they theorize that, "It may be
like this. It may be like that," but that is not perfect knowledge. So if you speculate with your imperfect
senses, what is the value of that knowledge? It may be, I mean to say, partial knowledge, but that is not
perfect knowledge.
Therefore our process of receiving knowledge is to receive it from the perfect person. And therefore we
are receiving knowledge from K■■■a, Bhagav■n, the most perfect, and therefore our knowledge is
perfect. Just like a child: he may be imperfect, but if his father says: "My dear child, this is called
spectacle," so if the child speaks, "This is spectacle," that knowledge is perfect. Because the child does
not make research to find out knowledge. He asks his father or mother, "What is this, Daddy? What is
this, Mother?" and the mother says: "My dear child, this is this." Another example can be given that if a
child does not, in childhood, he does not know who is his father, then he cannot make any research
work. If he makes research work to find out his father, he'll never find out his father. But if he asks his
mother, "Who is my father?" and the mother says: "He is your father," that is perfect. Therefore
knowledge, knowledge of God, who is beyond your sense perception, how can you know? Therefore
you have to know from God Himself or His representative.
So here K■■■a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is speaking, and that is the final authority. He
says to Arjuna as follows. He says, a■ocy■n anva■ocas tva■ prajñ■-v■d■■■ ca bh■■ase (BG
2.11): "My dear Arjuna, you are talking like very learned scholar, but you are lamenting on a subject
matter which you should not do." Gat■s■n agat■s■■■ ca n■nu■ocanti pa■■it■■. Gat■s■n means
this body. When it is dead or when it is alive, bodily conception of life is foolishness. So no learned man
takes serious consideration of the body. Therefore in the Vedic literature it is said that, "One who is in
the bodily concept of life, he is nothing more than an animal." Therefore at the present moment, without
knowledge of the self, the whole world is going on under the bodily concept of life. The bodily concept
of life is there amongst the animals. The cats and dogs, they are very proud of becoming a big cat or
big dog. Similarly, if a man also becomes similarly proud that, "I am big American," "big German," "big .
. ." what is the difference? But that is actually going on, and therefore they are fighting like cats and
dogs.
So we shall discuss more tomorrow.
Devotees: Jaya. All glories to ■r■la Prabhup■da. (end)
