Pradyumna: O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo
bhagavate v■sudev■ya. (leads chanting of verse) (devotees repeat)
(break)
utsanna—spoiled; kula-dharm■■■m—of those who have the family traditions; manu■y■■■m—of
such men; jan■rdana—O K■■■a; narake—in hell; niyatam—always; v■sa■—residence; bhavati—it
so becomes; iti—thus; anu■u■ruma—I have heard by disciplic succession.
Translation: "O K■■■a, maintainer of the people, I have heard by disciplic succession that those who
destroy family traditions dwell always in hell."
Prabhup■da: Hm. So family tradition . . . whose family tradition? Manu■y■■■■. Family . . .
manu■y■■■■, those who are human being, they have got family and family rituals, kula-dharma,
j■ti-dharma. Just like c■tur-var■ya■ may■ s■■■a■ gu■a-karma-vibh■ga■a■ (BG 4.13). This is
meant for the human being, manu■y■■■■, not for the animals. So unless the human society accepts
this principle of var■■■rama-dharma ordained by K■■■a, the Supreme Lord, he is not considered
amongst the human being. They are as good as animals, because there is no regular, systematic
principles of how to live, a human being.
Therefore in the Vi■■u Pur■■a . . . when Caitanya Mah■prabhu was talking with R■m■nanda Raya,
so Caitanya Mah■prabhu inquired, "What is the actual aim of life?" S■dhya-s■dhana (CC Madhya
8.118). S■dhya and s■dhana. "What is the aim?" S■dhya means what for this human form of life we
have got. That is called s■dhya, the goal, the goal of life. And s■dhana. S■dhana means the activity
by which we can attain, we can achieve that goal of life. This is called s■dhya-s■dhana.
The Darwin theory, although they are giving some idea of progressive evolution, but he does not know
what is the goal of life, why this progress is there. That these rascals they do not know. Simply just
imagining, taking some whims from the Padma Pur■■a, Brahm■ Vaivarta Pur■■a. A■iti■■
catur■■■ caiva, j■va-j■ti■u, lak■■■s t■n j■va-j■ti■u. There are 8,400,000 types of j■va-j■ti.
A■ati■■ catvar■■■ caiva lak■■■s t■n j■va-j■ti■u. So this is already there. Brahm■dbhi■. In this
way, the living entity is wandering in the cycle of transmigration of the soul. So from this, Mr. Darwin
might have taken some hints, but he could not explain properly. He could not catch up that
brahm■dbhi■, who is wandering. So it is a chaos.
So anyway, why this living entity is wandering, not fixed up? So there must be some goal. He is
hankering after that. There must be some goal of life. To achieve that goal of life, that is called s■dhya.
Why we are struggling here for happiness or something else? We are struggling. So this question was
raised by Caitanya Mah■prabhu, that "What is the goal of life?" Unless there is goal of life, why there is
struggle? Why . . . there must be some goal of life, s■dhya. And s■dhana. S■dhana means the means
by which we can achieve that goal of life. That is called s■dhana. S■dhana.
So R■m■nanda R■ya quoted . . . because when there is talk between two learned persons, they . . .
just like nowadays it has become a fashion: "In my opinion"; "I think in this way." What, nonsense, what
you can think? What is your knowledge? But he is very proud. Everyone like that. The other day, that
Sir Alistair? Alistair Hardy came. He also says: "It is my opinion." Nobody thinks that he is a nonsense
number one; what is the value of his opinion? Nobody thinks. But this is the Vedic principle.
Even Caitanya Mah■prabhu, He, when He was asked by Prak■■■nanda Sarasvat■ that, "You are a
sanny■s■. You do not engage Yourself in the study of Ved■nta. You are simply chanting Hare
K■■■a, Hare K■■■a," so . . . because a sanny■s■ is supposed to be always reading Ved■nta
philosophy especially, and all other philosophies. So "What is this, that you are chanting like a
sentimental person?" So Caitanya Mah■prabhu replied: "Yes, My Guru Mah■r■ja, spiritual master,
saw Me a fool number one."
So Caitanya Mah■prabhu, it was known to Prak■■■nanda Sarasvat■, He was a great learned scholar
in His student life. So He is posing Himself as a fool number one. So this is the way.
Caitanya-carit■m■ta, the author of Caitanya-carit■m■ta, he is presenting himself: pur■■era k■■a
haite muñi sei laghi■■ha (CC Adi 5.205): "I am lower than the worm of the stool." Pur■■era k■■a
haite muñi sei laghi■■ha. Laghi■■ha means lower, lowest. Jag■i m■dh■i haite muñi sei p■pi■■ha.
Jag■i and M■dh■i was taken, they were drunkards, woman hunters; therefore they were sinful.
So Caitanya-carit■m■ta kar says that jag■i m■dh■i haite muñi sei papi■■ha. Although . . . this is the
way. Nobody think himself as one has become very big man and he has his own opinion to give. This is
rascaldom. So everyone should think that, "I am . . . what is my value?" That is really learned, humble
and meek. Nobody should think that, "Now I have learned everything. I can surpass everyone. I have
become above all rules and regulation. Now I have become paramaha■sa." This is rascaldom.
Everyone should always think, "I am fool number one." Therefore the endeavor will go on, to become
perfect. If we think that, "Now I have become perfect, paramaha■sa," then the spiritual regulative
principles will never be followed, and you will fall down.
So here Arjuna also says that narake niyata■ v■so bhavati iti anu■u■ruma (BG 1.43): "K■■■a, I have
heard it from authorative source." He never says: "K■■■a, in my opinion, if it is done like that, then
people will go to hell." He does not give his own opinion. He says iti, "Thus," anu■u■ruma, "I have
heard." This is called parampar■ system. Nobody should give his own opinion. He must quote the
authoritative statement to support his proposition. So similarly, when Caitanya Mah■prabhu asked that,
"What is the aim of life, and how to achieve it?" so R■m■nanda R■ya, he did not give his own opinion
that, "In my opinion, like this."
Here also Arjuna says, ity anu■u■ruma, "I have heard it." He heard it means . . . ■u■ruma means
"Heard from authority." So R■m■nanda R■ya said that, "Real purpose of life, goal of life, is to satisfy
the Supreme Personality of Godhead." Just like as we are citizens, what is our duty? We want to satisfy
the authority, the government. When one serves the government nicely, in this country he is recognized
as knight. He is recognized as earl, as lord, as . . . so many, they have got title. Every country, when a
person is very exalted citizen, then he is recognized by the government.
So if this is the system in our ordinary life, then the aim of life should be to satisfy the supreme
governor, or supreme government. It is very commonsense. But they have no supreme government.
They think, "Whatever government we make, that is final." No. There are so many kingdoms, so many
planets. In each planet there is government, there is authority, and above all of them, there is the
supreme authority, K■■■a. ■■vara■ parama■ k■■■a■ sac-cid-■nanda-vigraha■ (Bs. 5.1). This is
the ■■stric injunction.
There are many controller. In this planet there is controller. There is another planet, another planet.
Even Brahma is the controller of the whole universe. Just like in our government there is system: one
department . . . several departments is being managed by another director. Several director is being
managed by another secretary. As . . . the same system. K■■■a is the supreme proprietor,
sarva-loka-mahe■vara (BG 5.29), and He has got many secretaries, assistants. They are called
Brahm■.
So Brahm■ means the manager of one brahm■■■a, universe. And there are millions of Brahm■s,
millions, trillions. They are numberless. Ananta-ko■i. Yasya prabh■ prabhavato jagad-a■■a-ko■i■
(Bs. 5.40). Ko■i. Ko■i means unlimited. Jagad-a■■a. Jagad-a■■a means universe. Brahm■■■a or
jagad-a■■a. A■■a. A■■a means it is egg-shaped, round, egg-shaped. Therefore it is called a■■a,
brahm■■■a. Bh■-gola. Gola means round. I have heard that before the science, the people were
under the impression that this world is square. Is it not?
Devotees: Flat.
Prabhup■da: Flat. Flat, yes. But in the Vedic ■■stra, millions of years ago it is mentioned: bh■-gola.
Gola. Gola means round. Just see. And these rascals say that formerly people were not so intelligent.
They are intelligent because they are thinking this world is flat. And those who have spoken millions of
years ago, "It is round," they will have less intelligence. Just see. Bh■-gola. Gola means round.
Bh■-gola. Similarly, jagad-a■■a. A■■a means round, just like egg. A■■a means egg. Jagat-a■■a.
This universe is egg-shaped. And we can see also, the sky is round. This is the wall of this universe.
So anyway, so as we are here, in this small government, our business is to satisfy the governor. You
publicly . . . suppose if you decry the queen. If you say publicly in a meeting that, "Queen is a
prostitute," then what will be? Immediately you will be arrested and punished. In your private house you
can say. Nobody will hear. But if you say such thing nonsense in public, immediately you will be
criminal. Therefore your duty is to respect the Queen, to abide by the orders of the government. That is
your aim of good citizenship. What is the difference between good citizen and outlaws? The difference
is a good citizen is always trying to satisfy the government by abiding the laws given by the
government.
So therefore our ultimate goal is to satisfy the supreme government, K■■■a. Because K■■■a is the
supreme. These universes, they are K■■■a's kingdom. There are many kingdoms. Just like we have
got many universes within this material world, similarly, there are many spiritual planets in the spiritual
world. These are commonsense affair. Why people will not understand? Therefore our business is to
satisfy K■■■a, to become perfect, satisfy K■■■a. Vi■■ur ■r■dhyate (CC Madhya 8.58). So how
vi■■ur ■r■dhyate? This is the philosophy. Na te vidu■ sv■rtha-gati■ hi vi■■um (SB 7.5.31).
Just suppose in an office your immediate boss, some superintendent of the office, you follow his orders,
although he is not final. Above the superintendent of the office, there is another secretary. Above the
secretary, there is one other director. Above the director, there is managing director. These are
commonsense things. Similarly there are many, many controllers, but the supreme controller is
K■■■a, or Vi■■u. So it is commonsense affair that our aim of life is to satisfy the Supreme Lord,
Vi■■u, or K■■■a. This is common sense. Is there any other reasoning that, "Why He should be
satisfied?" No. You have to satisfy.
So this is Vai■■avism. One who wants to satisfy Vi■■u, he is called Vai■■ava. That is Vai■■avism.
Vi■■u means the Supreme Lord. So everything is arranged to satisfy the Lord Vi■■u. So wherefrom it
begins? The cats and dogs, they can be trained up for satisfying Vi■■u? No, there is no possibility.
They are dogs, animals. They are simply busy with four principles of life: eating, sleeping, sex life and
defending. That's all. They cannot be trained up that, "You become very obedient to Lord Vi■■u.
Become a devotee." Man-man■ bhava mad-bhakto mad y■j■ m■■ namaskuru (BG 18.65). "You
become the devotee of K■■■a." No, that is not possible. Therefore it is said that manu■y■■■■.
Manu■y■■■■. It is the duty of the manusya, not of the dog. Manu■y■■■■.
Utsanna-kula-dharm■n■■ manu■y■■■■ jan■rdana (BG 1.43).
So human life has got a great responsibility. If you become like cats and dog, the hippies, then utsanna,
everything is destroyed. Utsanna-kula-dharma. They have no family. They don't care for any rules and
regulation. Utsanna, everything destroyed. Jaghanya-gu■a-v■tti-stha■ (BG 14.18). No family life, no
taking bath, no worship, nothing of . . . all irresponsible. I have seen it in Amsterdam. What is that park?
Ha■sad■ta: Vondelpark.
Prabhup■da: Horrible. Actually this, this, what was spoken by Arjuna five thousand years ago, it is now
happening. Utsanna, all destroyed, finished. Kula-dharm■n■m. No family life. So therefore for human
being, it is the duty to understand his position, and it is his duty to satisfy the Supreme Lord, Vi■■u.
This is the whole plan. Therefore R■m■nanda R■ya quoted the verse from Vi■■u Pur■■a that
var■■■ram■caravat■ puru■e■a para■ pum■n, vi■■ur ■r■dhyate (CC Madhya 8.58). Because the
aim is to satisfy Vi■■u, to become Vai■■ava.
To become br■hma■a is also lower status. You will hear from the Caitanya-carit■m■ta that our
M■dhavendra Pur■, he was installing Deities. So there are many br■hma■as, caste br■hma■a, born
in . . . so in order to give charge of worship to those br■hma■as, he initiated them to become
Vai■■ava. Because without becoming Vai■■ava, nobody has got right to worship Vi■■u. Vi■■u will
not accept anything from anyone unless he is devotee. And Vi■■u is poverty-stricken, that He has
come to take from you? He cannot eat? He has no eating means? No. He agrees to accept our offering
just on the basis of love. The Vai■■ava loves Vi■■u, and Vi■■u agrees to accept any foodstuff.
Patra■ pu■pa■ phala■ toya■ yo me bhakty■ prayacchati (BG 9.26). That bhakti is main thing, not
your palatable dish. Vi■■u is quite competent to prepare thousand times better palatable dishes than
you can offer. But the real thing is bhakti.
So vi■■ur ■r■dha■am means vi■■ur ■r . . . that should be the aim of human life. Vi■■ur ■radhana
means one must become a Vai■■ava, and Vai■■ava means regulated life, not destroyed everything,
finished, to become hogs. That is not Vai■■avism. Vai■■avism means regulated; aim—to, how to
satisfy Vi■■u. So whole Vedic scheme is there, how to satisfy Vi■■u. Therefore it is said that utsanna
kula-dharm■n■■ manu■y■■■■ (BG 1.43). In the human life, if they do not follow the regulative
principles of family life, family tradition and systematic arrangement of four division of the society,
br■hma■a, k■atriya, vai■ya, ■■dra . . . in this way we can satisfy the Supreme Lord.
Our aim is to satisfy the Supreme Lord, and this can be done perfectly if we follow the regulative
principles of j■ti-dharma, kula-dharma. J■ti-dharma means if you are born in the family of a
br■hma■a, you have got particular duties. Simply if you think yourself that, "I am born in a br■hma■a
family; my duty is all finished. Now I can do whatever nonsense . . ." They think like that. I have spoken.
They are very much proud of taking birth in br■hma■a family. So when others are engaged in
devotional service, they say: "Oh, you are born in lower family. You have got to do this.
We are born in br■hma■a . . . we have nothing to do." You see? But they do not know that j■ti-dharma
kula-ghn■n■m, utsanna-kula-dharm■nam. Even if you are actually br■hma■a, you must keep your
family tradition. That is br■hma■a. Otherwise, if you sacrifice everything of your family tradition . . . just
like in your country, the Lord family. The Lord family is maintained. The government . . . the Lord family
has got money deposited with the government, and government gives the interest so that the family
tradition may be maintained, the aristocratic style. Or if they spoil, then no more cares for them. Then
their house will be sold and they will be street-beggar. That's all. No more Lord family.
So everywhere, you take politically or socially or spiritually, for human being, if you want to make your
life successful, then you must keep the tradition of br■hma■a-vai■■ava. So our, we are Vai■■ava.
Our only tradition is how to satisfy Vi■■u. That is the tradition of everyone, but especially Vai■■ava.
They must be very alert, very careful, how to keep Lord Vi■■u or K■■■a satisfied. That is our only
business. So you should not neglect it. Then utsanna-kula-dharm■n■m . . . then you will spoil
everything. When you have invited Vi■■u or K■■■a, Caitanya Mah■prabhu, to accept your service,
you must be very, very careful how to render service—how cleansely, how nicely you have to serve.
Otherwise everything will be spoiled. Utsanna-kula-dharm■n■m. A Vai■■ava's kula-dharma is simply
to satisfy K■■■a.
So in the . . . manu■y■■■■. Actually, human life begins when he is ready to serve the Supreme Lord,
Vi■■u. That is human life; otherwise the animal life. Therefore the whole world is in chaos. They are
not eager to serve Vi■■u. They are simply eager to serve their senses. Go-d■sa, servant of the
senses. So instead of becoming servant of the senses, you have to become master of the senses. That
is called gosv■m■. If you remain servant of the senses, then you are go-d■sa. K■m■din■■ katidh■
kati na . . . (CC Madhya 22.16).
That is animal life. But when you become master of the senses . . . how it is possible, master of the
senses? Now, if you employ your senses always in the service of K■■■a, your senses are already
controlled. Just like your tongue. Your tongue asks you, "Go to the restaurant and eat some nice thing."
But if you are a Vai■■ava, if you have this vow that, "I shall not allow my tongue to eat anything except
pras■dam," it is already controlled. Gosv■m■. That means, to control the senses means to engage the
senses in the service of the Lord. This is control. Otherwise, by force . . .
Just like the yog■s, they try artificially by some gymnastic. That may be possible for some time, but it is
. . . there are many instances, it became . . . (break) Because by force they cannot control the senses.
That is not possible. You must give better engagement. (break) By force, if you think that, "I shall
control my tongue, I shall control my eyes, I shall control my genital, I shall control my belly . . ."
Artificial. That may be possible for some time, but they are so strong, the senses are so strong,
artificially it cannot be stopped. Para■ d■■■v■ . . .
(break) . . . stated in the Bhagavad-g■t■. You give the senses better engagement. Then you can
control. H■■■ke■a h■■■ke■a-sevana■ bhaktir uttam■. Sarvop■dhi-vinirmukta■ tat-paratvena . . .
(CC Madhya 19.170). (break) You have to purify the senses. How? By engaging the senses in the ser .
. . (break) . . . tat paratvena. (break) Then you will be able to purify the senses. And with purified
senses, when you are engaged in the service of the Supreme, that is called bhakti.
So if we are actually human beings, manu■y■■■■ . . . (break) Kula-dharma, this family tradition, is not
meant for the cats and dogs. If you live like cats . . . (break) . . . there is no question of family tradition.
But if you live . . . want to live like human being, manu■y■■■■, then this system must be . . . (break) .
. . puru■e■a para■ pum■n (CC Madhya 8.58). Catur-v■r■ya■ may■ s■■■a■
gu■a-karma-vibh■ga■a■ (BG 4.13). Then society must be divided into four classes. As we have got
four divisions in . . . (break) . . . br■hma■a, k■atriya, vai■ya, ■■dra must be there. (break) And each
one should serve according to his gu■a-karma, quality and capacity to work. Then the whole society is
organized . . . (break) . . . will be perfect, there will be peace . . . (break) . . . no war, nothing of the sort,
and gradually making progress back to home, back to Godhead. Otherwise it will be chaos . . . (break) .
. . become at the present moment.
So . . . (break) . . . utsanna kula-dharm■n■■ manu■y■■■■. Manu■ya, jan■rdana. Jana means
general public, and "one who controls." K■■■a controls every . . . (break) . . . Jan■radana. So "My
dear Jan■rdana, K■■■a, in the human society, if we spoil this traditional process, then what . . .? It
becomes . . ." Narake niyata■ v■so (BG 1.43). If you do not . . . (break) . . . if we live like cats and dog,
then next life we get cats and dog . . . (break) But these rascals, they do not know. They do not believe
in the next life. So it is horrible condition. Purposefully you put yourself, if you do not follow . . . (break) .
. . process. The var■■■rama-dharma . . . (break) . . . society. Utsanna-kula-dharm■n■■
manu■y■n■■ jan■rdana, narake niyatam. Niyatam means always. (break) Just like the hog, hellish
life . . . (break) . . . eating stool, living in filthy place. M■y■ is dictating, "You are . . . (break) . . . more
than a king." Yes. Sometimes Indra became a hog, and . . . by the curse of B■haspati. So when
Brahm■ again came to recall him . . . (break) . . . he was Indra. He denied. (break) . . . responsibility.
Family . . . (break) The hog . . . (break) . . . ■vara■■tmik■-■akti. (break) . . . lowest standard of living.
He will think that, "I am very happy." This is called ■vara■a . . . (break) So if the hog thinks that, "I am
living . . ." (break) Then he will die. In the human mind . . . (break) . . . hellish condition of life, then he
can make progress in spiritual life. And for so long he thinks that "I am living very peacefully, very
happily . . ." (break) . . . then ath■to brahma jijñ■s■. Unless one comes to that . . . that sense will come
when one follows the tradition of family life. (end)
