Pradyumna: O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo
bhagavate v■sudev■ya. (Prabhup■da and devotees repeat) (leads chanting of verse)
(break) (leads chanting of synonyms)
. . . vyavasthit■n—situated; d■■■v■—looking on; dh■rtar■■■r■n—the sons of Dh■tar■■■ra;
kapi-dhvaja■—one whose flag is marked with Hanum■n; prav■tte—while about to be engaged;
■astra-samp■te—the arrows released; dhanu■—bow; udyamya—after taking up; p■■■ava■—the
son of P■■■u (Arjuna); h■■■ke■am—unto Lord K■■■a; tad■—at that time; v■kyam—words;
idam—these; ■ha—said; mah■-pate—O King.
Translation: "O King, at that time Arjuna, the son of P■■■u, who was seated in his chariot, his flag
marked with Hanum■n, took up his bow and prepared to shoot his arrows, looking at the sons of
Dh■tar■■■ra. O King, Arjuna then spoke to H■■■ke■a, K■■■a, these words."
Prabhup■da: Hm. So again the word h■■■ke■a is used here. In the beginning also, h■■■ke■a■
p■ñcajanyam. K■■■a is again designated as H■■■ke■a. As we have explained several times, bhakti
means h■■■kena h■■■ke■a-sevana■ bhaktir ucyate (CC Madhya 19.170). Bhakti, the whole
devotional service program, means h■■■kena h■■■ke■a-sevanam. So Arjuna was meant for serving
K■■■a, because he is bhakta. K■■■a has already addressed him, bhakto 'si, priyo 'si, rahasya■ hy
etad uttamam (BG 4.3): "My dear Arjuna, I am speaking to you the mystery of Bhagavad-g■t■." It is a
mystery. Mystery means very complicated; no ordinary man can understand. Therefore it is called
mystery, rahasyam. But not ordinary rahasyam—uttamam. Uttamam means transcendental, not
covered with darkness of material science. But it is brilliant, daivam, divyam. Rahasyam.
So ordinary man cannot understand. Therefore they interpret foolishly, speculate, and demonstrate
their rascaldom. That's all. Even big, big scholars. So they cannot understand, because they are not
devotee. It is meant for the devotee. This whole Bhagavad-g■t■ is a transaction between God and His
devotee. There is nothing more. Just like if you go to the market and two mercantile men talking. It
should be understood that he is also businessman, he is also businessman, so they must be talking
something about business. It is natural conclusion. It is not that two businessmen are talking seriously,
not that they are discussing Bhagavad-g■t■. You cannot say that.
They must be talking about business, something about profit. Just like all the businessmen, they
assemble in exchange, like stock exchange. So there is howling, great sound, talking with each other,
tumultuous sound. That tumultuous sound means one businessman is talking, "What is your rate? This
is my rate. What is your rate?" This is. That's all. You cannot expect that a stock exchange, the people
gathered there, they are talking something about Bh■gavata and Bhagavad-g■t■. No.
Similarly, when there is talk between the Supreme Lord K■■■a and His devotee, so this whole talk is
bhakti. It is nothing else. They derive some meaning, jñ■na, jñ■n■tmaka-vy■khy■. They describe on
the understanding of the jñ■n■s, philosophical speculators. They are also candidate. Those who are
jñ■ni actually, they are also interested to know what is K■■■a. Jñ■n■ ca bharatar■abha, jijñ■sur.
■rto arth■rth■ jijñ■sur jñ■n■ ca bharatar■abha (BG 7.16). These four classes of men, provided their
background is pious life.
Impious life cannot inquire about God or can understand about God. We have several times repeated
the verse:
P■p■s, sinful men, they cannot understand. They understand, only think that, "K■■■a is Bhagav■n;
so I am also Bhagav■n. He's an ordinary man, maybe little powerful, historically very famous man. So
He is, after all, a man. So I am also man. So why not I am God?" This is the conclusion of the abhaktas,
nondevotees and sinful men. So anyone who is declaring himself God, immediately you should know
he is the greatest sinful man. And if you study his private life, you will see that he is number one sinful
man. This is the test. Otherwise, nobody will say that, "I am God," this false representation. Nobody.
Any pious man will not do that. He knows, "What I am? I am ordinary human being. How can I claim to
take the position of God?" And they become famous among rascals.
As it is stated in the ■r■mad-Bh■gavatam, ■va-vai u■■ra kharai■. What is that verse?
U■■ra-kharai■, sa■stuta■ puru■a■ pa■u■ (SB 2.3.19). They . . . in this world we see there are
many great men, so-called great men, and they are very much praised by the general people. So
Bh■gavata says that anyone who is not a devotee, who never chants the Hare K■■■a mantra, he may
be very great man in the estimation of rascals, but he is nothing but an animal. Animal. So,
■va-vi■-var■ha-u■■ra-kharai■: "So how you can say such a great man, you are saying that animal?"
Our business is very thankless task. We say any man who is not a devotee, he is rascal. We say
generally. It is very harsh word, but we have to use it. As soon as we see that he is not a devotee of
K■■■a, then he's a rascal. How do we say? He is not my enemy, but we have to say, because it is
stated by K■■■a.
If we are really K■■■a conscious, then our business is to repeat the words of K■■■a. That's all. What
is the difference between a K■■■a's representative and non-representative? The representative of
K■■■a will simply repeat what K■■■a says. That's all. He becomes representative. It doesn't require
much qualification. You simply repeat with firm conviction. As K■■■a says, sarva-dharm■n parityajya
m■m eka■ ■ara■a■ vraja (BG 18.66). So one who has accepted this fact that, "If I surrender to
K■■■a, my all business is successful," he is K■■■a's representative. That's all.
You don't require to be very highly educated or advanced. Simply if you simply accept that what
K■■■a says . . . just like Arjuna said, sarvam eta■ ■tam manye yad vadasi ke■ava (BG 10.14): "My
dear K■■■a, Ke■ava, whatever You are saying, I accept it, without any change." That is bhakta.
Therefore Arjuna is addressed, bhakto 'si. This is the bhakta's business. Why shall I think of K■■■a as
like me, ordinary man? This is the difference between a bhakta and not bhakta. A bhakta knows that "I
am insignificant, a small spark of K■■■a. K■■■a is individual person. I am also individual person. But
when we consider about His power and my power, I am most insignificant." This is understanding of
K■■■a.
There is no difficulty. Simply one must be sincere, not sinful. But a sinful man cannot understand Him.
The sinful man, he will say: "Oh, K■■■a is also man. I am also man. Why I am not God? He is simply
God? No, I am also. I am God. You are God, you are God, every God." Just like Vivekananda said:
"Why you are searching after God? Don't you see so many Gods are loitering in the street?" You see?
This is his God realization. This is his God realization. And he became a big man: "Oh, he is seeing
everyone God."
This foolishness, this rascaldom, is going on all over the world. One does not know what is God, what is
power of God, what is meant by God. They are accepting some rascal as God, as nowadays that is
going on. Another rascal has come. He is also declaring himself God. So it has become very cheap
thing. But they have no brain to think that "I am claiming God. What power I have got?"
So this is the mystery. This is the mystery. Without becoming devotee, the mystery of understanding
God is not possible. And K■■■a has said in the Bhagavad-g■t■ how one can know Him. Bhakty■
m■m abhij■n■ti y■v■n ya■ c■smi tattvata■ (BG 18.55). Only by devotion, simply. He could have
said, "By high, topmost knowledge" or "By yogic process" or "By acting . . . becoming a very great
karm■, worker, one can understand Me." No, He has never said. Never said. So the karm■s, jñ■n■s,
yog■s, they are all rascals. They cannot understand K■■■a. All rascals. Karm■s are third-class
rascals, the jñ■n■s are second-class rascal, and the yog■s are first-class rascal. That's all.
You should understand, the so-called yog■s, they are first-class rascal because they do not
understand K■■■a. The jñ■n■s, they are also second-class rascal. Even a big scholar like Dr.
Radhakrishnan, he is how, I mean to say, deforming the meaning of Bhagavad-g■t■. K■■■a says,
man-man■ bhava mad-bhakto mad-y■j■ m■■ namaskuru (BG 18.65): "You always think . . ." This is
K■■■a consciousness, man-man■: "Always think of K■■■a, Me, about Me," K■■■a says. And they
will make meaning that you can say also. "K■■■a says that you always think of Him; you can say also,
'Think of me.' " This meaning they are distorting. So K■■■a says, man-man■ bhava mad-bhakto
mad-y■j■ m■■ namaskuru (BG 18.65), and this Dr. Radhakrishnan says, "It is not to the K■■■a
person." Just see. Just a big scholar, doctor of philosophy, he cannot understand K■■■a. K■■■a
says directly, man-man■ bhava mad-bhakta■ (BG 9.34). He is interpreting in a different way.
Therefore this word is used here, h■■■ke■a. H■■■ke■am ida■ v■kyam . . . h■■■ke■am tad■
v■kyam idam ■ha mah■-pate (BG 1.20). Mah■-pate, "O King." Sañjaya was addressing
Dh■tar■■■ra. He's a king. So mah■-pate. H■■■ke■a■ kapi-dhvaja■. Kapi-dhvaja■ is nominative.
So "He said." Kapi-dhvaja■. Kapi-dhvaja■ is also significant. Kapi-dhvaja■, Arjuna, on his . . . just like
nowadays also, every nation has different types of flags, so Arjuna also had his flag on the . . . dhvaja■.
Dhvaja■ means the flag. The flag was on the top of his chariot, and it was marked with Hanum■n,
Vajr■■gaj■—Vajr■■gaj■, Hanum■n, who fought for Lord R■macandra. He is fighting for K■■■a, so
he is also following the footsteps of Vajr■■gaj■.
Vai■■avism is like that. Mah■jano yena gata■ sa panth■■ (CC Madhya 17.186). Mah■jano yena
gata■ sa panth■■. Vai■■ava should follow his previous mah■jana, authority. That is Vai■■avism.
We don't manufacture ideas. We don't commit such rascaldom. We simply accept the behavior or the
activities of previous ■c■rya. There is no difficulty. There is no difficulty.
So in the fighting principle, Arjuna is fighting for K■■■a. He is following the previous fighting ■c■rya,
Hanum■nji. Therefore he has depicted his flag with Hanum■n that, "Hanum■nji, Vajr■■gaj■, kindly
help me." This is Vai■■avism. "I have come here to fight for Lord K■■■a. You fought also for the Lord.
Kindly help me." This is the idea. Kapi-dhvaja■. So any activities of the Vai■■ava, they should always
pray to the previous ■c■rya, "Kindly help me. Kindly . . ." This is . . . Vai■■ava is always thinking
himself helpless. Helpless. And begging help from the previous ■c■rya. Just like in
Caitanya-carit■m■ta you will find, the author, at the end of every chapter:
His every line, he is thinking of R■pa-Raghun■tha, previous ■c■ryas. "So let me surrender to the
gosv■m■s, and they will help me how to write." You cannot write. That is not possible.
So this is Vai■■ava's policy. Vai■■ava ■h■kura, tom■ra kukkura, baliy■ janaha more (■ara■■gati
19). Bhaktivinoda ■h■kura has sung: "My dear Vai■■ava ■h■kura, you just accept me as your dog,
as the dog works by the indication of the master." He will give his life. Dog has a good qualification:
however a strong dog may be, when the master orders, he will give his life. This is dog, faithful, so
faithful to the master. So vai■■ava ■h■kura . . .
So Bhaktivinoda ■h■kura is praying, vai■■ava ■h■kura, tom■ra kukkura, baliy■ janaha more: "My
dear Vai■■ava ■h■kura"—Vai■■ava ■h■kura means guru—"kindly accept me as your dog." And he
describes, I forget the exact language, that "I will always try to protect you. As dog keep watch, so I will
watch so nobody can come to disturb you. And whatever little pras■dam you will give me, I'll be
satisfied." Dog . . . that dog's qualification. The master is eating, but the dog will never come, unless the
master gives little morsel. He is satisfied. He is satisfied.
So this is Vai■■avism, to follow the previous ■c■rya. This is Vai■■avism. Mah■jano yena gata■ sa
panth■■ (CC Madhya 17.186), dharmasya tattva■ nihita■ guh■y■■ mah■jano yena gata■ . . . tarko
'prati■■ha■ ■rutayo vibhinn■ (Mah■bh■rata, Vana-parva 313.117). Tarko, if you are very great
logician, you can argue, "Oh, why K■■■a can be God? I can be God." By logic you may defeat an
ignorant devotee, but ■■stra says by becoming a big logician, you cannot understand transcendental
knowledge. Transcendental knowledge you have to understand by submitting, pra■ip■tena, tad viddhi
pra■ip■tena (BG 4.34). First of all surrender. Tad viddhi. If you want to know this transcendental
science, then you must fully surrender. This is first qualification. Tad viddhi pra■ip■tena paripra■nena
sevay■. Three things. First surrender; then if you cannot understand, then you question.
Otherwise, you have no right to question from a Vai■■ava. Not that, "Can you show me God?" What
qualification you have got, you want to see God? Another rascal will say: "Yes, I will show you God.
Come to me. I shall show you God." This is going on. One rascals inquires, "Can you show me God?"
and the big rascal says: "Yes, come to me alone. I shall show you God." This business is going on.
God-seeing is so cheap thing that any rascal comes, "Can you show me God?" and another rascal
says: "Yes, come to me. In the evening I shall show you." That means if he is a foolish rascal, then he
will show him something magic, and he will understand, "Oh, I have seen God." That's all. Finished.
God-seeing business is finished. And he comes . . . after God-seeing, he is the same, the same rascal.
What improvement you have . . . you have seen God. What improvement you have made? God-seeing
is so cheap thing? No.
So we should be very careful. If we actually are interested in understanding . . . manu■y■■■■. It is not
so easy. In the Bhagavad-g■t■ you will find. Manu■y■■■■ sahasre■u ka■cid yatati siddhaye (BG
7.3). Out of many millions of person, ka■cid yatati siddhaye, one person becomes interested how to
make his life successful. Because they do not know what is successful life. They simply know how to
work like hogs and dogs, day and night working. And what is the goal of life? Now, sense gratification.
Just like the hogs. Hogs, you will find, day and night finding out where is stool. And he will eat. And as
soon as the hogs become very fatty, because they eat actually very substantial . . .
Stool is chemically very substantial food. It contains hydrophosphites. The doctors said. I do not know
whether they have tasted. (laughter). But they taste it actually. When they test in laboratory, they taste.
I know that. They taste it. They have to taste it. Because their laboratory, chemical examination means
the symptoms has to be written, the characteristics. Just like potassium cyanide they have not tasted.
Because as soon as you taste, you will die. (laughter)
So chemical analysis means one has to test to find out the characteristic. So this I have seen, one
doctor friend, he was keeping one dysentery stool in a plate, so . . . on his table. I saw. "What is this,
doctor?" He said: "Oh, it is to be tasted . . . it is dysentery stool". So they taste it. They have to. They
take fish . . . everyone, medical men, know. So this hog's business is to eat stool, and as soon as he
gets fatty, then sex. And that sex has no discrimination. You will see, a hogs, he does not care whether
mother, sister or anyone, daughter. It doesn't matter. So this is hog civilization—simply eating and
getting strength of the senses and enjoy it.
This human life is not meant for that purpose. Therefore it is said that a person without God
consciousness, K■■■a consciousness, he is no better than these dogs and hogs. That's all. This is
our conclusion. We don't give any formal respect. Of course, we have to give, because we are in this
world. But at heart we cannot give respect to a person who has not any sense of K■■■a
consciousness. We cannot give. Because who is going to give any respect to the dogs and hogs?
■va-vi■-var■ho■■ra-kharai■ sa■stuta■ puru■a■ pa■u■ (SB 2.3.19).
Therefore J■va Gosv■m■ has commented on this verse . . . if somebody says that, "This Mr.
Such-and-such, this Dr. Such-and-such, he is respected by so many people, and you are saying that
he's a rascal? What is this?" So J■va Gosv■m■ says that, "This man who is respected, but he is
respected by whom? He is respected by this class of men: dogs, hogs, camel and asses. So he is a big
pa■u."
Just like the lion. Lion is respected in the forest by dogs, hogs, camel and asses and other animals,
because lion is the king of the animals. But does it mean, because he is designated as the king of
animal, it has got any use? Has it got any use for any purpose? Similarly, these political leaders, they
may be lion, but who respects them? These dogs, hogs, camels and asses, that's all. He may be a big
animal, but he is animal, no better than a big animal. That's all. And other animals praises—dogs, hogs,
camels.
Every word in the ■r■mad-Bh■gavata we have to . . . we have described why especially these animals
have been selected, dogs, hogs, camel and asses. A dog is very faithful to his master. He will commit
so many offenses for the sake of the master. Because he knows, "The master gives me food." So in
your country, if you pass through one's house, from within the house they will bark, "Ba! Ba! Ba! Ba!
Why you are going in front of my house?" This is committing offense, committing offense unnecessarily.
So the dog's business: one side, he is very faithful, and one side, he is simply committing offense,
unnecessarily frightening other people, you see. Unnecessarily, without any offense. And dog's another
business is that he is seeking always master. Unless he finds out a good master, it is a street dog and it
has no place. It has no place. It will not get sufficient food, become lean and thin, and loiter in the street.
Because dog must find out . . . ■■dra-like. ■■dra, unless he finds out a master to provide him, his all
education is useless.
Nowadays they are educated, but they must have a good service. That means he's a ■■dra. Without
finding a master, his education has no value. So therefore in the ■■stra it is said, kalau ■■dr■
sambhav■■. Kalau, "In this age, Kali-yuga, everyone is ■■dra." Because he cannot even live without
having a master. He must have a master to provide him. But the Vedic culture is that br■hma■a,
k■atriya, vai■ya, they will not accept any service. No. They will die of starvation. Especially
br■hma■a. That is enjoined in the ■■stras, that a br■hma■a, if he is in bad position some way or
other, economically, he may accept the position of a k■atriya or a vai■ya, but he should not accept the
position of a ■■dra. That is doggish. This is so injunction.
Therefore, formerly a br■hma■a, when he accepts a service from anywhere, he was rejected from the
br■hma■a society. You know San■tana Gosv■m■. San■tana Gosv■m■, R■pa Gosv■m■, they
belonged to a very high class br■hma■a, Sarasvata br■hma■a, very rich men. But both the brothers
accepted service in Muhammadan government as ministers, and they were immediately rejected from
the br■hma■a society. It is not very long ago, say about five hundred years ago. The br■hma■a
society was so strong. As soon as they will accept service . . . you know, the Tagore family of Calcutta,
Rabindranath Tagore, they are also br■hma■as. But we know, in our childhood, they were also
excommunicated from the br■hma■a family because they also accepted service.
So these are Vedic principles. If we follow . . . the br■hma■a will not accept anyone's service. That is
against. Similarly, k■atriya. K■atriya . . . why this fight between Arjuna? They made them bereft of the
kingdom. So they appealed to Duryodhana that, "My dear Duryodhana, you are my brother, you have
taken all our properties. So we are k■atriya. We are not going to become vai■ya or br■hma■a. We
must live. Give us at least five villages, five brothers. We shall be satisfied. There is no question of
war." "No, sir. Not even the land which can hold the point of needle I cannot spare. There is no way."
Therefore there was fight. There was fight.
So these are the some of the glorious points of this fight. But he depended on K■■■a, Arjuna.
Therefore he was successful, victorious. You do, act, as k■atriya. Not that as k■atriya he should
become a br■hma■a beggar. No. A k■atriya cannot be beggar, neither a br■hma■a cannot be
vai■ya. This is real caste system. But you work as a cobbler and at the same time you claim to become
a br■hma■a, this is not allowed. So formerly, the king used to see whether a br■hma■a is acting like a
br■hma■a. Otherwise he will be stopped. Then he will be designated as he is working. This was the
duty of the king, to see that everyone is employed according to his profession. It was the duty of the
king to see. Everyone must be employed. A br■hma■a must be working like a br■hma■a. A k■atriya
must be working like a k■atriya. A vai■ya must be working as a . . . otherwise he cannot say.
Not like at the present moment, a br■hma■a is working a servant, a ■■dra, and he is br■hma■a. No.
This is called asuric var■■■rama. Var■■■rama. Var■■■rama is very good institution. But still,
var■■■rama, perfect var■■■rama, cannot be possible in this age. Therefore when there was talk
between Caitanya Mah■prabhu and R■m■nanda R■ya that how perfection of life can be attained, so
R■ma■anada Raya first of all quoted a verse from Vi■■u Pur■■a (3.8.9):
That "When human society accepts this var■■■rama institution—br■hma■a, k■atriya, vai■ya,
■■dra, brahmac■r■, g■hastha, vana . . ." This is Vedic civilization. Without this division, there is no
civilization. They are animals. So therefore he quoted this verse, var■■■ram■c■ravat■ puru■e■a
para■ pum■n: "If anyone is following the principles of var■■■rama, then he is worshiping Lord
Vi■■u." Because the whole life is meant for worshiping Vi■■u. The present civilization, they do not
know that. Na te vidu■ sv■rtha-gati■ hi vi■■um (SB 7.5.31). They do not know, rascals, that what is
the aim of life. Aim of life is to become Vai■■ava, servant of Vi■■u. Therefore the very word is used
h■■■ke■a. H■■■ke■a, He is the guide. ■■vara■ sarva-bh■t■n■■ h■d-de■e 'rjuna ti■■hati (BG
18.61).
So Arjuna was strictly following the Vai■■ava principles, and therefore he inquired from H■■■ke■a,
because he knows, "The H■■■ke■a will guide me." Sarvasya c■ha■ h■di sannivi■■o (BG 15.15).
H■di sannivi■■o. Matta■ sm■tir jñ■nam apohana■ ca. So Arjuna knew it. Therefore this very word is
used. The other day, also, h■■■ke■a word was there. And bhakti means to satisfy H■■■ke■a. This
is bhakti. H■■ikena h■■■ke■a-sevana■ bhaktir ucyate (CC Madhya 19.170). Bhakti, this is the
simple definition of bhakti. H■■■kena. H■■■ka means the senses. As you have got hands, legs,
eyes, ears . . . these are different senses. When you engage your senses only for the service of
K■■■a, then you become devotee. That's all. Your life is perfect.
You simply see K■■■a nicely decorated in the temple. That is bhakti. You simply prepare foodstuff for
K■■■a. That is bhakti. You simply chant the holy name of K■■■a. That is bhakti. In this way we can
utilize all the senses. We can utilize our hands in collecting flowers, in cleansing the temple. If we
haven't got education, ignorant, it doesn't require. Simply engage your senses, h■■■kena
h■■■ke■a-sevanam (CC Madhya 19.170). Then you become perfect.
You have got your senses. Engage the senses for the service of K■■■a. Then you become perfect.
Very nice thing. You don't require to become a very big philosopher, very rich man, very nicely
educated. Nothing of the sort. Simply you have got your senses. Engage the senses in the service of
K■■■a, your life is perfect.
Thank you very much. Hare K■■■a.
Devotees: All glories to ■r■la Prabhup■da. (cut) (end)
