Prabhup■da: (k■rtana) (prema-dhvani) Thank you very much. (devotees offer obeisances)
Read. Hare K■■■a.
Devotee: Second Chapter?
Prabhup■da: Yes, Second.
Devotee: Start at verse 8? "I can find no means to drive away this grief which is drying up my senses. I
will not even be able to destroy it if I win an unrivaled kingdom on the earth with sovereignty like the
demigods in heaven. (BG 2.8)
"Sañjaya said: Having spoken thus, Arjuna, chastiser of the enemies, told K■■■a, 'Govinda, I shall not
fight,' and fell silent." (BG 2.9)
"O descendant of Bharata, at that time K■■■a, smiling in the midst of both the armies, spoke the
following words to the grief-stricken Arjuna." (BG 2.10)
"The Blessed Lord said . . ."
Prabhup■da: So when we become very serious in a dangerous position, as if we are lost, but K■■■a
smiles. You see? Sometimes we think . . . this is called illusion. The same example, just a man in
dreaming, crying, "There is tiger, there is tiger. It is eating me," and the man who is awakened, he is
smiling, "Where is the tiger?" (chuckles) "Where is the tiger?" And this man is crying, "Tiger, tiger,
tiger." Similarly, when we are very much perplexed . . .
Just like the politicians, they are sometimes perplexed in political situation and claiming, "This is my
land, my country," and other party also claiming, "It is my land, my country," and they are fighting very
gravely, K■■■a smiles: "What these nonsense are claiming 'my country, my land'? It is My land, and
they are claiming 'my land' and fighting."
Actually, the land belongs to K■■■a, but these people, under illusion, claiming, "It is my land, it is my
country," forgetting how long he shall belong to this country or this nation. That is called illusion.
So this is our position. Without understanding our real position we are perplexed with these all worldly
problems, which are all false. Janasya moho 'yam aha■ mameti (SB 5.5.8). Moha, moha means
illusion. This is the illusion. So everyone is under this illusion. So one who is intelligent, if he can
understand that this worldly position is simply illusion . . . the, all the thoughts which I have concocted,
based on the principle of "I" and "my," this is all illusion. So one, when one is intelligent to get out of the
illusion, he surrenders to a spiritual master.
That is being exemplified by Arjuna. When he's too much perplexed . . . he was talking with K■■■a as
friend, but he saw that, "This friendly talking will not solve my question." And he selected K■■■a . . .
because he knew the value of K■■■a. At least, he ought to have known. He is friend. And he knows
that K■■■a is accepted . . . "Although He is acting as my friend, but by great authorities K■■■a is
accepted as the Supreme Personality of Godhead."
That was known to Arjuna. So he said that, "I'm so much puzzled that I cannot understand. Even
accepting that I shall be victorious in this battle, still I shall not be happy. What to speak of being
victorious of this planet, if I become the king of all other planets or if I become a demigod in the higher
planetary system, still this distress cannot be mitigated." You see?
Devotee: Verse 11: "The Blessed Lord said: While speaking learned words you are mourning for what
is not worthy of grief. Those who are wise lament neither for the living nor the dead."
Purport: "The Lord at once took the position of a teacher and chastised His student, calling him
indirectly a fool. The Lord said: 'You are talking like a learned man, but you do not know that one who is
learned, one who knows what is body and what is soul, does not lament for any stage of the body,
neither in the living nor in the dead condition.' "
"As explained in the later chapters, it will be clear that knowledge means to know matter and spirit and
the controller of both. Arjuna argued that religious principles should be given more importance than
politics or sociology, but he did not know that knowledge of matter, soul and the Supreme is more
important than religious formularies."
"And because he was lacking in that knowledge, he should not have posed himself as a very learned
man. As he did not happen to be a very learned man, he was consequently lamenting for something
which was unworthy of lamentation."
"The body is born and is destined to be vanquished today or tomorrow. Therefore the body is not as
important as the soul. One who knows this is actually learned. For him there is no cause for lamentation
in any stage of the material body."
Twelve . . .
Prabhup■da: He says, K■■■a says that, "This body, either dead or alive, has nothing to be lamented."
Dead body, suppose when the body is dead, it has no value. What is the use of lamenting? You can
lament for many thousands of years, it will not come to life. So there is no cause of lamenting on dead
body. And so far spirit soul is concerned, that is eternal.
Even it appears to be dead, or with the death of this body, he does not die. So why one should be
overwhelmed, "Oh, my father is dead, my such-and-such relative is dead," and crying? He's not dead.
This knowledge one must have. Then he'll be cheerful in all cases, and he'll be interested simply in
K■■■a consciousness. There is nothing to be lamented for the body, either alive or dead. That is
being instructed by K■■■a in this chapter.
Go on.
Devotee: "Never was there a time when I did not exist, nor you, nor all these kings. Nor in the future
shall any of us cease to be." (BG 2.12)
Purport: "In the Vedas, in the Ka■ha Upani■ad, as well as in the ■vet■■vatara Upani■ad, it is said
that . . ."
Prabhup■da: (correcting pronunciation) ■vet■■vatara.
Devotee: ■vet■■vatara.
Prabhup■da: There are many Upani■ads; they are called Vedas. Upani■ads are the headlines of the
Vedas. Just like in a chapter there is a headline, similarly, these Upani■ads are the headlines of the
Vedas. Ka■hopani . . . there are 108 Upani■ads, principal. Out of that, nine Upani■ads are very
important. So out of those nine Upani■ads, ■vet■■vatara Upani■ad, Taittireya Upani■ad, Aitareya
Upani■ad, ■■opani■ad, Mu■■aka Upani■ad, M■■■■kya Upani■ad, Ka■hopani■ad, these
Upani■ads are very important.
And whenever there is argument on some point, one has to give reference from these Upani■ads. If
one can give reference from the Upani■ads, then his argument is very strong. ■abda-pram■■a.
Pram■■a means evidence. Evidence . . . if you want to gain in your case . . . just like you have to give
very nice evidence in a court, similarly, according to Vedic culture, the evidence is pram■■a. Pram■■a
means evidence. ■abda-pram■■a.
There are three kinds of evidences accepted by the learned scholars in Vedic culture. One evidence is
pratyak■a. Pratyak■a means direct perception. Just like I am seeing you, you are seeing me. I am
present, you are present. This is direct perception. And there is another evidence, which is called
anum■na.
Suppose in that room, and I am coming just now, I do not know whether any person there is or not. But
there is some sound, I can imagine, "Oh, there is somebody." This is called anum■na. In logic it is
called hypothesis. That is also evidence. If by my bona fide suggestion I can give evidence, that is also
accepted.
So direct evidence and, what is called, hypothesis, or suggestion evidence. But the strong evidence is
■abda-pram■■a. ■abda, ■abda-brahman. That means Veda. If one can give evidence from the
quotation of the Vedas, then it is . . . it has to be accepted. Nobody can deny the Vedic evidence. That
is the system.
How it is so? Caitanya Mah■prabhu has given very nice example. That is in the Vedas. Just like we
keep conchshell in the Deities' room. Conchshell is considered very pure, transcendental—otherwise,
how we can keep before Deity and you blow conchshell, you offer water with conchshell? How you can
offer? But what is this conchshell? The conchshell is the bone of an animal. It is nothing but bone of an
animal.
But the Vedic injunction is that if you touch the bone of an animal, you'll have to take bath immediately.
You become impure. Now one may say, "Oh, this is contradiction. In one place it is said that if you
touch the bone of an animal, then you have to purify yourself by taking bath immediately, and here, the
bone of an animal is in the Deities' room."
So it is contradiction, is it not? If bone of an animal is impure, how you can place it in the Deities' room?
And if bone of an animal is pure, then what is the meaning of becoming impure and take bath? You'll
find similar contradiction in the Vedic injunctions. But because it is said by the Vedas that bone of an
animal is impure, you have to accept. But this bone of an animal, conchshell, is pure. Just like
sometimes our students are perplexed when we say that onion is not to be taken, but onion is a
vegetable.
So ■abda-pram■■a means the Vedic evidence should be taken in such a way that no argument.
There is meaning; there is no contradiction. There is meaning. Just like several times I have told you
that cow dung. Cow dung is, according to Vedic injunction, is pure. In India it is actually used as
antiseptic. In villages especially, there is large quantity of cow dung, and they're, all over the house they
have smeared to make the house antiseptic.
And actually, after smearing cow dung in your room, when it is dried, you'll find refreshed, everything
antiseptic. It is practical experience. And one Dr. Ghosh, a great chemist, he examined cow dung, that
why cow dung is so much important in the Vedic literature. He found that cow dung contains all the
antiseptic properties. In ■yur-veda, cow dung dried and burned into ashes is used as toothpowder. It is
very antiseptic toothpowder.
Similarly, there are many things, many injunctions in the Vedas, which may apparently appear as
contradiction, but they are not contradiction. They are on experience, on transcendental experience.
Just like a father says to his child that, "My dear child, you take this food. It is very nice." And the child
takes it, believing the father, authority. The father says . . . the child knows that, "My father . . ." He is
confident that "My father will never give me anything which is poison."
Therefore he accepts it blindly, without any reason, without any analysis of the food, whether it is pure
or impure. You have to believe in such a way. You go to a hotel because it is licensed by the
government. You have to believe when you take foodstuff there it is nice, it is pure, or it is antiseptic, or
it is . . . but how do you know it? The authority. Because this hotel is authorized by the government, it
has got license, therefore you believe.
Similarly, ■abda-pram■■a means as soon as there is evidence in the Vedic literature, "This is this,"
you have to accept. Then your knowledge is perfect because you are accepting things from the perfect
source. Similarly K■■■a, K■■■a is accepted as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Whatever He
says, it is all right. Accept. Arjuna said at last, sarvam etad ■ta■ manye (BG 10.14): "My dear K■■■a,
whatever You say I accept it." That should be our principle. Why should we bother about researching
when the evidence is there from the authority?
So to save time, to save trouble, one has to accept the authority, actual authority. This is the Vedic
process. And therefore Veda says, tad vijñ■n■rtha■ sa gurum ev■bhigacchet (Mu■■aka Upani■ad
1.2.12). Tad vijñ■n■rtham, in order to learn that transcendental science, one has to accept guru.
Gurum eva: certainly, one must. Otherwise there is no possibility. Therefore K■■■a is accepted here
as the spiritual master of Arjuna, and as the spiritual master or father or teacher has got right to
chastise his son or disciple . . .
A son is never dissatisfied when father chastises. That is the etiquette everywhere. Even the father is
sometimes violent, the child or the son tolerates. A typical example is Prahl■da Mah■r■ja. Innocent
child, K■■■a consciousness child, but father torturing. He never says anything. "All right."
Similarly K■■■a, just after taking the position of the spiritual master, is designating Arjuna as a grand
fool. Just like Caitanya Mah■prabhu also said that, "My spiritual master found Me a great fool." Was
Caitanya Mah■prabhu a fool? And can it be possible that anyone can become the spiritual master of
Caitanya Mah■prabhu?
Both things are impossible. Caitanya Mah■prabhu, even not accepting Him as incarnation of K■■■a, if
simply you accept Him as ordinary scholar or man, there was no comparison of His scholarship. But He
said that, "My spiritual master found Me a great fool."
What is that meaning? That, "A person, even in My position, always remains a fool before his spiritual
master. That is good for him." Nobody should impose that, "What do you know? I know better than
you." This position is not . . . denied.
And other point is, from the disciple's point of view, why he should remain always a fool before a
person, unless he's actually authorized, actually so great that he can teach me as a fool. One should
select a spiritual master in that way, and as soon as the spiritual master is selected, one should remain
always a fool, although he may not be a fool. But the better position is like that.
So Arjuna, instead of remaining on the same level as friend and friend, voluntarily accepting to remain a
fool before K■■■a. And K■■■a is accepting that "You are a fool. You're talking just like a learned
man, but you are a fool because you are lamenting on a matter which no learned man laments." That
means "A fool laments" that, "You are a fool. Therefore you are a fool." It is in a roundabout way.
Just like . . . what is called in logic? Parenthesis? Or something like that, called. Yes. That if I say that,
"You look like that person who stole my watch," that means "You look like a thief." Similarly, (chuckles)
K■■■a, in a roundabout way, says that, "My dear Arjuna, you are talking just like a learned man, but
you are lamenting on a subject matter which no learned man laments."
Go on.
Devotee: "In the ■vet■■vatara Upani■ad it is said that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the
maintainer of innumerable living entities, in terms of their different situations according to individual
work and reaction to work. That Supreme Personality of Godhead is also, by His plenary portions, alive
in the heart of every living entity. Only saintly persons, who can see within and without the same
Supreme Personality of Godhead, can actually attain to perfect peace eternal.
"The same Vedic truth enumerated herein is given to Arjuna, and in that connection to all persons in the
world who pose themselves as very learned but factually have very poor fund of knowledge. The Lord
says clearly that He Himself, Arjuna, and all the kings who are assembled in the battlefield are eternally
individual beings and that the Lord is eternally the maintainer of the individual living entities."
Prabhup■da: What is the original verse? You read.
Devotee: "Never was there a time when I did not exist, nor you, nor all these kings . . . " (BG 2.12)
Prabhup■da: Now, "Never there was a time when I did not exist, nor you, nor these people." Now He
analytically says: "I, you and . . ." first person, second person and third person. That is complete. "I, you
and others." So K■■■a says, "Never there was a time when I, you and all these persons who have
assembled in this battlefield did not exist." That means "In the past, I, you and all of them, they
individually existed." Individually.
The M■y■v■d■ theory is that the ultimate spirit is impersonal. Then how K■■■a can say that, "Never
there was a time when I, you and all these persons never existed"? That means, "I existed as
individual, you existed as individual, and all these persons who are before us, they existed as
individual. Never there was a time."
Now, what is your answer, D■naday■la? K■■■a says never we were mixed up. We are all individuals.
And He says: "Never we shall remain . . . never there will be time when we shall not exist." That means
in the past we existed as individual, in the present there is no doubt we are existing as individual, and in
the future also, we shall continue to remain as individual.
Then when the impersonal conception comes at all? In the past, present, future, there are three times.
Huh? In all the times we are individuals. Then when God becomes impersonal or I become impersonal
or you become impersonal? Where is the chance?
Now K■■■a clearly says: "There was never a time when I, you and all these individual kings or
soldiers . . . it was not that we did not exist in the past." So in the past we existed as individual, and the
present there is no doubt, we are existing as individual. You are my disciple, I am your spiritual master,
but you have got your individuality, I have got my individuality. If you don't agree with me, you can leave
me.
That is your individuality. So if you don't like K■■■a, you cannot become in K■■■a consciousness.
That is your individuality. So this individuality continues. Similarly K■■■a, if He does not like you, He
may refuse you K■■■a consciousness. Not that because you are following all the rules and
regulations, K■■■a is obliged to accept you. No. If He thinks that, "He's nonsense; I cannot accept
him," He'll reject you.
So He has got individuality, you have got individuality, everyone has got individuality. Where is the
question of impersonalism come? There is no possibility. And if you don't believe K■■■a, you don't
believe Vedas, apart from anything else, K■■■a is accepted as the supreme authority, the Personality
of Godhead. Then if we don't believe Him, then where is the possibility of advancing in knowledge?
There is no possibility of it. So there is no question of individuality. This is the statement of authority.
Now, apart from statement of authority, you have to apply your reason and arguments. Can you say
anywhere there is agreement between two parties? No. You go, study. In the state or in the family, in
the community, in the nation there is no agreement. Even in the assembly, even in your country.
Suppose there is Senate. Everyone has got country's interest, but he's thinking in his individual way.
One is thinking that, "My country's welfare will be in this line." Otherwise, why there is competition
during election of president? Everyone is saying that, "America needs Nixon." And another president,
he also says: "America needs me." So, but why two? If America needs you, and you are both . . . no.
There is individuality. Mr. Nixon's opinion is something else. Mr. another candidate's opinion is
something else.
In the assembly, in the Senate, in the Congress, in the United Nations, everyone is fighting with his
individual view. Otherwise, why there are so many flags in the world? You cannot say anywhere
impersonalism. Personality is predominating everywhere. Everywhere, the personality, individuality, is
predominant. So we have to accept. We have to apply our reason, arguments, and accept the authority.
Then the question is solved. Otherwise it is most difficult.
Devotee: "The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the supreme individual person, and Arjuna, the
Lord's eternal associate, and all the kings assembled there are individual eternal persons. It is not that
they did not exist as individuals in the past, and it is not that they will not exist . . . they will not remain
as eternal persons. Their individuality existed in the past and their individuality will continue in the future
without interruption.
"Therefore there is no cause for lamentation for any one of the individual living entities. The
M■y■v■d■, or impersonal, theory that after liberation the individual soul, separate on account of
m■y■, or illusion, will merge into the impersonal Brahman without individual existence . . ."
Prabhup■da: Now, the M■y■v■d■ says that this individuality is m■y■. So their conception is that
spirit, the whole spirit is a lump. Their theory is gha■■k■■a po■■k■■a. Gha■■k■■a po■■k■■a
means . . . just like sky. The sky is an expansion, impersonal expansion. So in a pot, in a water pot, in a
pitcher that is closed . . .
Now, within the pitcher there is also sky, a small sky. Now as soon as the pitcher is broken, the outside,
the bigger sky, and the small sky within the pitcher mixes. That is M■y■v■da theory. But this analogy
cannot be applied. Analogy means points of similarity. That is the law of analogy. The sky cannot be
compared . . .
The small sky within the pitcher cannot be compared with the living entity. It is material, matter. Sky is
matter, and individual living entity is spirit. So how you can say? Just like a small ant, it is spirit soul. It
has got its individuality. But a big dead stone, hill or mountain, it has no individuality.
So matter has no individuality; spirit has individuality. So if the points of similarity differ, then there is no
analogy. That is the law of analogy. So you cannot analogize with matter and spirit. Therefore this
analogy is fallacious, the gha■■k■■a po■■k■■a.
Then another evidence is in the Bhagavad-g■t■. K■■■a says that mamaiv■■■o j■va-bh■ta (BG
15.7): "These individual souls, they are My part and parcel," j■va-loke san■tana■, "and they are
eternal." That means eternally they are part and parcel. Then when . . . how this M■y■v■da theory can
be supported, that due to m■y■, being covered by m■y■, they are now appearing individual, separate,
but when the covering of m■y■ will be taken away, they will mix up just like the small sky within the
pitcher and the big sky outside mixes? So this analogy is fallacious from logical point of view, as well as
from authentic Vedic point of view. They are eternally fragments.
There are many other evidences from Bhagavad-g■t■. Bhagavad-g■t■ says that spirit cannot be
fragmented. So if you say that by covering of m■y■ the spirit has become fragment, that is not
possible. It cannot be cut. Just like if you cut one big piece of paper into small fragments, it is possible
because it is matter, but spiritually it is not possible. Spiritually, eternally, the fragments are fragments,
and the Supreme is Supreme. K■■■a is the Supreme, and we are fragmental parts. We are fragments
eternally.
These things are explained in Bhagavad-g■t■ in different places very nicely. I request you all to keep
one copy of this Bhagavad-g■t■, every one of you, and read it carefully. And there will be examination
in the coming September. So . . . of course, that is voluntary. But I request you to prepare for the
examination next September. And one who will pass the examination will get the title Bhakti-■■str■.
Have you distributed that . . .? Yes.
Go on.
Devotee: "Nor is the theory that we only think of individuality in the conditioned state supported herein.
K■■■a clearly says that in the future also the individuality of the Lord and others as it is . . ."
Prabhup■da: K■■■a never says that after liberation these individual souls will mix up with the
Supreme Soul. K■■■a never says in the Bhagavad-g■t■.
Devotee: "K■■■a clearly says that in the future also the individuality of the Lord and others, as it is
confirmed in the Upani■ads, will continue eternally. This statement of K■■■a is authoritative."
Prabhup■da: Yes, Upani■ad says nityo nity■n■m. Now, nitya means eternal, and the Supreme Lord is
the supreme eternal, and we individual souls, we are also many eternals. So He is the leader eternal.
Eko bah■n■m . . . how He is leader? Eko bah■n■■ vidadh■ti k■m■n (Ka■ha Upani■ad 2.2.13).
That one, singular number eternal, person, He is supplying all the needs of other eternals. These things
are clearly said in the Vedas. And actually we are experiencing. Just like in Christian theology, the
individual goes to the church and prays God, "Give us our daily bread." Why he's asking God? Of
course, this atheist class of men are now teaching them, "Where is bread? You are going to church.
You come to us, we shall supply you bread."
So this Vedic thought is there also. The Veda says, eko bah■n■■ vidadh■ti k■m■n. That supreme
one eternal, He's supplying, He's maintaining all other individual eternals. And Bible also enjoins that,
"You go, ask for your bread to God."
So unless God is maintainer and supplier, why this injunction is there? Therefore He is the leader; He is
the maintainer. And the Vedas clearly says this is the position. He is the Supreme. And by knowing this,
one can become in peace. That is the Vedic injunction.
Go on.
Devotee: "This statement of K■■■a is authoritative, because K■■■a cannot be subject to illusion. If
individuality . . ."
Prabhup■da: Yes. If the M■y■v■d■ philosopher says that this statement of K■■■a is in m■y■, that
"He says that 'Everyone was individual in the past.' No, in the past everyone was one, lump sum,
homogeneous. By m■y■, we have become individual . . ."
If the M■y■v■d■ says like that, then K■■■a becomes one of the conditioned soul. He does not . . .
He loses His authority. Because conditioned soul cannot give you the truth. I am conditioned soul. I
cannot say something which is absolute.
So K■■■a is accepted as the Absolute. So if the M■y■v■d■ theory is accepted, then K■■■a's
theory has to be rejected. If K■■■a is rejected, then there is no need of reading K■■■a's book,
Bhagavad-g■t■. It is useless, waste of time, if He's a conditioned soul like us. Because we cannot take
any instruction from a conditioned soul.
So the spiritual master, even if you take that he is conditioned soul, but he does not speak anything
from his own side. He speaks from K■■■a's side. So unless . . . the Vedic principle is that unless one
is not liberated from the material conditions, he cannot give us any perfect knowledge.
The conditioned soul, however he may be academically advanced, educated, he cannot give us any
perfect knowledge. Only one who is above the condition of these material laws, he can give us the
perfect knowledge.
Similarly ■a■kar■c■rya, he's also impersonalist, but he accepts K■■■a the supreme authority. Sa
bhagav■n svaya■ k■■■a (SB 1.3.28): "K■■■a is that Supreme Personality of Godhead." The
modern M■y■v■d■ philosophers, they do not disclose this statement of ■a■kar■c■rya, to cheat
people. But ■a■kar■c■rya's statement is there. We can give evidence. He accepts K■■■a as the
supreme authority.
He has written so many nice poems praising or worshiping K■■■a. And at the last time he says, bhaja
govinda■ bhaja govinda■ bhaja govinda■ m■■ha-mate: "You rascal fools. Oh, you are depending on
grammar to understand. This is all nonsense." Bhaja govindam: "Just worship Govinda." Bhaja
govinda■ bhaja . . . three times he says, "Just worship Govinda." Bhaja govinda■ bhaja govinda■
bhaja govindam.
Just like Caitanya Mah■prabhu says three times, harer n■ma harer n■ma harer n■ma (CC Adi 17.21).
Three times means giving too much stress. Just like we sometimes say: "You do this, do this, do this."
That means no more denial. Finish all stress. So as soon as one thing is three times stressed, that
means final. So ■a■kar■c■rya says, bhaja govinda■ bhaja govinda■ bhaja govinda■ m■■ha-mate.
M■■ha. M■■ha I've several times explained. M■■ha means rascal, ass. "You are depending on your
grammatical understanding," duk■n kara■e.
Duk■n, these are grammatical affix and prefix, pratya, prakara■a. "So you are depending on this
verbal root, that verbal root, and creating, interpreting your meaning in a different way. All this is
nonsense. This duk■n kara■e, your grammatical jugglery of words, will not save you at the time of
death. You rascal, you just worship Govinda, Govinda, Govinda." That is the instruction of
■a■kar■c■rya.
Because he was a devotee, he was a great devotee. But he pretended to be an atheist because he was
to deal with the atheist. Unless he presents himself as an atheist, the atheist followers will not hear him.
Therefore he presented M■y■v■da philosophy for the time being. The M■y■v■da philosophy cannot
be accepted eternally. The eternal philosophy is Bhagavad-g■t■. That is the verdict.
Go on.
Devotee: "If individuality is not a fact, then K■■■a would not have stressed it so much even for the
future. The M■y■v■d■ . . ."
Prabhup■da: Yes. He says that there was no such time when we are not individual, and there will be
no such time in the future when we shall not remain individual. And so far present is concerned, we are
all individual. You know. So where is the possibility of losing individuality, become imperson? No. There
is no possibility.
This voidism, impersonalism, they are artificial way of negating the perplexing variegatedness of this
material existence. That is the negative side only. That is not a positive side. A positive side is that, as
K■■■a says, tyaktv■ deha■ punar janma naiti m■m eti kaunteya (BG 4.9): "After giving up this
material tabernacle, one comes to Me." Just like after leaving this room, you have to enter another
room. You cannot say that, "After leaving this room, I shall live in the sky." Similarly, after leaving this
body, if you go to K■■■a in the spiritual kingdom, your individuality will be there, but you'll have that
spiritual body. When there is spiritual body there is no perplexities.
Just like your body is different from the body of the aquatics. The aquatics, they have no disturbance in
the water because their body is made like that. They can live there peacefully. You cannot live.
Similarly, the fishes, if you take them out of the water, they cannot live.
Similarly, because you are spirit soul, you cannot live peacefully in this material world. This is foreign.
But as soon as you enter into the spiritual world, your life is eternal, blissful and full of knowledge, real
peace. Tyaktv■ deha■ punar janma naiti (BG 4.9). K■■■a says: "After leaving this body, he does not
come to this perplexities of material world." M■m eti, "He comes to Me." "Me" means His kingdom, His
paraphernalia, His associates—everything.
If some rich man or some king says: "All right, you come to me," that does not mean that he's
impersonal. If a king says: "Come to . . ." means that he has got his palace, he has got his secretary, he
has got his nice apartment, everything is there. How he can be imperson? But he says only "Come to
me." This "me" means everything. This "me" does not mean impersonal. And we get information from
Brahma-sa■hit■:
So He's not impersonal. He's raising cows, He's with hundreds and thousands of goddess of fortune,
His friends, His paraphernalia, His kingdom, His house, everything is there. So there is no question of
impersonalism.
Yes.
Devotee: "The M■y■v■d■ may argue that the individuality spoken of by K■■■a is not spiritual but
material. Even accepting the argument that the individuality is material, how can one distinguish
K■■■a's individuality?"
Prabhup■da: They also think of K■■■a, therefore, as material. That is also condemned by K■■■a.
You'll find, avaj■nanti m■■ m■■h■ m■nu■■■ tanum ■■ritam (BG 9.11): "Because I have appeared
just like a human being, these rascals deride at Me that I am also one of them." M■■ha. M■■ha
means rascal. Just like Dr. Radhakrishnan says, "It is not to K■■■a. K■■■a . . . it is the soul within the
K■■■a." That means he identifies K■■■a as one of us: His body and His soul different.
But K■■■a is not . . . K■■■a said, sambhav■my ■tma-m■yay■ (BG 4.6): "I appear in My own,
original stature. I do not change." We change. The individual soul . . . prak■te■ kriyam■■■ni (BG
3.27). He's conducted by, influenced by this prak■ti, nature, but He's not conducted or influenced by
the nature. He comes in His own influence, as He is, ■tma-m■yay■. This is the distinction. Therefore
He does not change body. When I come, I change bodies. This time I may have this body; next time I
may have another body. That is material, and therefore I forget. Just like K■■■a says in the Fourth
Chapter that "Many times you and I came. You have forgotten." Because we change our material body,
therefore we forget. These things all will be explained.
Go on.
Devotee: "K■■■a affirms His individuality in the past and confirms His individuality in the future also.
He has confirmed His individuality in many ways, and impersonal Brahman has been declared as
subordinate to Him. K■■■a has maintained spiritual individuality all along, and if He is accepted as an
ordinary conditioned soul in individual consciousness, then His Bhagavad-g■t■ has no value as an
authoritative scripture."
"A common man with all the defects of human frailty is unable to teach that which is worth hearing.
Bhagavad-g■t■ is above such literature. No mundane book compares with the Bhagavad-g■t■. When
one accepts K■■■a as an ordinary man, the Bhagavad-g■t■ loses all importance."
"The M■y■v■d■ argues that the plurality mentioned in this verse is conventional, and that the plurality
thus refers to the body. But previous to this verse such a bodily conception has already been
condemned. After condemning the bodily conception of living entities, how was it possible for K■■■a
to place a conventional proposition on the body again?"
"Therefore, the plurality is on spiritual grounds, as is confirmed by great teachers like ■r■ R■m■nuja.
It is clearly mentioned in many places in the Bhagavad-g■t■ that this spiritual plurality is understood by
those who are devotees of the Lord."
"Those who are envious of K■■■a as the Supreme Personality of Godhead have no bona fide access
to the great literature. The nondevotee's approach to the teachings of the Bhagavad-g■t■ is something
like a bee licking on a bottle of honey. One cannot have a taste of honey unless one can taste within
the bottle. Similarly, the mysticism of the Bhagavad-g■t■ can be understood only by devotees."
"No one else can taste it, as is stated in this Fourth Chapter of the book. Nor can the G■t■ be touched
by persons who envy the very existence of the Lord. Therefore the M■y■v■d■ explanation of the
G■t■ is a most misleading presentation of the whole truth. Lord Caitanya has forbidden us to read
commentaries made by the M■y■v■d■s."
Prabhup■da: Yes. Lord Caitanya has clearly said, m■y■vadi-bh■■ya ■unile haya sarva-n■■a (CC
Madhya 6.169). One meets a disaster if he hears a M■y■v■d■ philosopher to understand Vedic
literature. That is His injunction. M■y■vadi-bh■■ya ■unile haya sarva-n■■a. Sarva-n■■a means
disaster. It is actually disaster. A m■y■vadi-bh■■ya, M■y■v■d■ commentary, they have simply tried,
the individual, tiny individual spiritual spark that, "You are the Supreme."
So he's just a Dr. Frog. You see. So puffed up, puffed up, when he . . . at one time, it will burst.
Therefore it is disastrous. It is disastrous. (chuckling) M■y■vadi-bh■■ya ■unile haya sarva-n■■a. So
that's all. Finished? Yes. Oh, not yet?
Devotee: "Therefore the M■y■v■d■ explanation of the G■t■ is a most misleading presentation of the
whole truth. Lord Caitanya has forbidden us to read commentaries made by the M■y■v■d■s and
warns that one who takes to understanding of the M■y■v■d■ philosophy loses all power to
understand the real mystery of the G■t■."
"If individuality refers to the empirical universe, then there is no need for teachings of the Lord. The
plurality of the individual souls and of the Lord is an eternal fact, and it is confirmed by the Vedas as
above mentioned."
Prabhup■da: So you read very carefully Bhagavad-g■t■. You have to meet so many opposing
elements, so you have to argue and you convince them.
Hmm. (sa■k■rtana party enters and offers obeisances)
So, what is your report?
Tam■la K■■■a: Yesterday we sold 125 magazines and collected twenty dollars. Today, so far, during
the day, we have sold . . . how many have you sold today?
Devotee: Eighty-five.
Tam■la K■■■a: Eighty-five today so far.
Prabhup■da: And there is night.
Tam■la K■■■a: Tonight, we will go out tonight.
B■rabhadra: I have a question. In about the middle of your lecture you said that K■■■a said that
everybody always lived on. "I lived on, you lived on and everybody here lived on." Does that means us
in this room lived on, too? We always lived?
Prabhup■da: What do you think?
B■rabhadra: I don't know.
Prabhup■da: Yes. "All" means including all men of this room also. You also.
B■rabhadra: I lived on?
Prabhup■da: Yes. You lived in the past, you are living at present, you will live in the future also. Is that
all right?
B■rabhadra: I understand now.
Prabhup■da: Hmm?
Devotee: I read somewhere in your writings that in order to understand the confidential affairs of
R■dh■ and K■■■a one must serve the gop■s who are servants of the gop■s, and I assumed that
you were a servant of the gop■s. Is that correct? Or . . . how do I serve the servants of the gop■s?
Prabhup■da: gop■s, they are not conditioned souls. They are liberated spirits. So first of all you have
to come out from this conditioned life. Then the question of serving gop■ will come. Don't be, at the
present moment, very eager to serve gop■. Just try to get out of your conditional life. Then time will
come when you'll be able to serve gop■.
In this conditional stage we cannot serve anything. K■■■a is performing it. But K■■■a gives us
opportunities to accept service in this arc■-m■rga. Just like we keep the Deity of K■■■a, offer
pras■dam under regulation, under principle. So we have to make advance in this way, this chanting,
hearing, and worshiping in the temple, ■rati, offering pras■dam. In this way, as we make advance,
then automatically K■■■a will reveal to you, and you'll understand your position, how you have to . . .
gop■s means who are always, constantly engaged in the service of the Lord. So that eternal
relationship will be revealed. So we have to wait for that. Immediately we cannot imitate serving gop■s.
That's a good idea that we shall serve gop■, but it will take time. Not immediately. Immediately we
have to follow the rules and regulation and routine work.
Yes?
Vi■■ujana: Do the liberated souls also seek after this K■■■a consciousness? Those who have
become free . . .
Prabhup■da: They become perfect in K■■■a consciousness. Liberated soul means . . . we are just
trying to be K■■■a conscious. We are not actually in full K■■■a consciousness. We are . . . just like a
diseased person is trying to recover. So one who is recovered, there is no question of his healthy life.
We are trying to be healthy, our present position. So we are trying to be K■■■a conscious. So one
who is liberated he is nothing but K■■■a conscious. You follow? Yes.
K■■■a consciousness is the perfection of life. So we are trying to reach that platform of perfection by
regulative principle. But when we are actually on the platform, there is nothing but K■■■a
consciousness. That is the perfection of life. That is our actual, liberated stage. J■vera svar■pa haya
nitya-k■■■a-d■sa (CC Madhya 20.108). That is our svar■pa. Svar■pa means actual constitutional
position. And mukti, liberation, means to come to that real position. Just like healthy life means to come
to the normal life from the diseased stage. That is healthy life and normal life.
So K■■■a consciousness is our normal consciousness. This normal consciousness is now polluted.
We have got so many other consciousness. So this is an attempt to get out of all, I mean to say,
infected consciousness, come to the real stage of pure K■■■a consciousness.
One question. No more. Next day.
Yes?
Devotee: In ■r■mad-Bh■gavatam you have said that . . . it's stated that Vy■sadeva was afraid when
S■ta Gosv■m■ was born that he would leave home because he was already a liberated soul.
Prabhup■da: Hmm?
Devotee: It says in the ■r■mad-Bh■gavatam that Vy■sadeva was afraid that S■ta Gosv■m■ when
he was born would leave home because he was already a liberated soul.
Prabhup■da: Yes.
Devotee: But he was attracted to K■■■a's pastimes.
Prabhup■da: Yes.
Devotee: So what . . .?
Prabhup■da: That is the sign of liberated soul. Because to become attracted by K■■■a, that is our
normal condition. So he was liberated; therefore normally he became attracted with K■■■a's pastimes.
That is his normal life. One who is not attracted by K■■■a's pastimes, he will be attracted by President
Johnson's pastimes. (laughter)
One has to be attracted. One has to be attracted by the dog's pastimes. Don't you see a person how he
is serving the dog? The dog stands, passes urine, he also stands. You see? He's a human being, and
he is waiting for the dog passing urine. How much he is attending the pastimes of the dog?
So if you are not attracted by the pastimes of God, then you'll have to be attracted by the pastimes of
the dog. There is no other alternative: either m■y■ or K■■■a. The atheist, agnostic, they deny
K■■■a's pastimes; therefore they remain attracted by the pastimes of this material world.
Yes?
Madhudvi■a: Prabhup■da, I think this is . . . did Lord Caitanya take sanny■sa from a M■y■v■d■
sanny■s■?
Prabhup■da: Yes. That is a formality. That is not very important. Because M■y■v■d■ Sanny■s■s,
they are also Vedic sanny■s■. They are not outsiders. But their interpretation of Veda is different. But
they follow the Vedic rules. So this acceptance of sanny■sa is following a principle of the Vedic rules.
So the M■y■v■d■ sanny■s■ may differ in his interpretation, but he's following the Vedic rules. So this
acceptance of sanny■sa is following the Vedic rules. So you can accept sanny■sa even from
M■y■v■d■. It doesn't matter.
But you have to transcend the limits of Vedic rules. That is K■■■a consciousness. That also Caitanya
Mah■prabhu . . . although He took sanny■sa, He did not assume the sanny■sa title. His sanny■sa
guru was Ke■ava Bh■rat■. Naturally, He would have accepted the Bh■rat■ title, ■r■ K■■■a
Bh■rat■, or something like that. But He remained ■r■ K■■■a Caitanya. Caitanya is the name of the
brahmac■r■ under the Bh■rat■ sanny■s■.
One brahmac■r■. The brahmac■r■s are under . . . they are assistant or personal servitors of a
sanny■s■. That is the system. So Caitanya Mah■prabhu was . . . in the beginning, He was accepted . .
. that is the M■y■v■d■ system. One is accepted first of all as brahmac■r■. So that, His name was
Caitanya.
But even after His acceptance of sanny■sa, He did not assume the title Bh■rat■. That means actually
He did not take sanny■sa. That was simply formality. Because M■y■v■d■ sanny■s■ thinks that he is
God; so how He can assume that title? He was preaching, He was going to preach that we are servant
of God; therefore He did not assume that title.
And besides that, when Caitanya Mah■prabhu was going to Lord . . . see Jagann■tha Pur■, His rod
was taken away by Nity■nanda and it was broken and thrown away. So He, apparently He became
very angry that "You have broken My rod, sanny■sa rod. So I am not going with You." He separated.
These statements are there in the Caitanya-carit■m■ta.
So in one sense, Caitanya Mah■prabhu did not require to accept any sanny■sa guru, but He accepted
the formality that if one takes sanny■sa, one has to take sanny■sa from another sanny■s■. That is
the system. Just like if you want to get yourself married, you have to call for a priest. That does not
mean that you have to agree with the priest's personal opinion. Do you follow? Yes.
He may execute the rules and regulation of marriage ceremony, but that does not mean that one has to
agree with the priest's opinion, personal opinion. This is the answer. But when you accept a spiritual
master, that is not allowed. Unless you cent per cent agree with the spiritual master's opinion or
philosophy, there is no need of accepting a spiritual master. There is no need.
Yes?
Jaya-gop■la: How is M■y■dev■ in such a distasteful position? How did she acquire her position?
Prabhup■da: (S)He's not acquired. (s)he's given that position by K■■■a. Because there are many
individual souls who will defy K■■■a, therefore M■y■v■d■ (M■y■dev■) is required to punish them .
. . M■y■dev■ is required to punish them. Daiv■ hy e■■ gu■amay■ mama m■y■ duratyay■ (BG
7.14): "It is very difficult to surpass the stringent laws of My m■y■." The laws . . . the m■y■ is not
independent. Just like police force. What is the value of police force unless government gives the
power? Does it mean . . . suppose a Mr. John, he comes as a policeman. He's Mr. John. What power
he has got?
But because government has given him power, he can arrest you. Similarly, M■y■ has no powers.
K■■■a has given her power to chastise these individual souls who are defying the authority of
K■■■a. They should be punished. It is M■y■'s thankless task, but M■y■ is obedient servant of
K■■■a. Mama M■y■. He says, "My M■y■."
So M■y■ is not degraded. M■y■ is faithful servant of K■■■a. She is faithfully serving. That is stated
in the Brahma-sa■hit■. You should read. So many nice books you have got. What is M■y■ doing?
That is stated in the Brahma-sa■hit■:
Durg■ is M■y■. Now what is the position of M■y■? M■y■ is so strong that s■■■i-sthiti-pralaya: she
can perform creation, maintenance and dissolution of this whole universe. She's so powerful. The
material nature is so powerful. So s■■■i-sthiti-pralaya-s■dhan a-■aktir ek■. Alone, she can do this as
good as K■■■a, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
S■■■i-sthiti-pralaya-s■dhana-■aktir ek■ ch■yeva. But she is just like shadow. Ch■yeva yasya.
Ch■yeva yasya . . . she is working just like shadow. Just like here is shadow of my hand. If I shake my
hand, the shadow also shakes. The M■y■ is acting like that. In the Bhagavad-g■t■ also it is said,
may■dhyak■e■a prak■ti■ s■yate sa-car■caram (BG 9.10): "Under My superintendence, prak■ti, the
nature, or M■y■, is acting." Ch■yeva yasya bhuvan■ni vibharti durg■.
And next line, icch■nur■pam api yasya ca ce■■ate s■, that M■y■ is acting under the direction of the
Personality. And who is that personality? Govindam adi-puru■a■ tam aha■ bhaj■mi. "That personality
is Govinda, the Supreme Person. I am offering my respectful obeisances." So M■y■ is acting under
the direction of K■■■a just like the shadow is moving under the movement of the original.
So M■y■'s position is not degraded. Don't think like that. Therefore Vai■■ava offers all respect to
M■y■, because she is working under K■■■a. She is Vai■■av■.
She is also energy of K■■■a. Therefore she is also Vai■■av■. In the Ca■■■ . . . (break) (end)
