Pradyumna: O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo
bhagavate v■sudev■ya. (leads chanting of verse) (Prabhup■da and devotees repeat)
(Prabhup■da corrects pronunciation of last line)
(break)
na—nor; ca—also; etat—this; vidma■—do know; katarat—which; na■—us; gar■ya■—better;
yat—what; v■—either; jayema—conquer us; yadi—if; v■—or; na■—us; jayeyu■—conquer;
y■n—those; eva—certainly; hatv■—by killing; na—never; jij■vi■■ma■—want to live; te—all of them;
avasthit■■—are situated; pramukhe—in the front; dh■rtar■■■r■■—the sons of Dh■tar■■■ra.
Translation: "Nor do we know which is better—conquering them or being conquered by them. The sons
of Dh■tar■■■ra, whom if we killed we should not care to live, are now standing before us on this
battlefield."
Prabhup■da: So these two groups of cousin-brothers . . . Mah■r■ja P■■■u had five sons and
Dh■tar■■■ra had one hundred sons. So it is family, the same family, and it was understanding
between them that when others beyond the family would come to attack them, they would join, 105
brothers, and fight. But when there was fight amongst themselves—one side, hundred brothers; one
side, five brothers.
Because a k■atriya family, it is to be understood they must go on fighting. Even in their marriage there
would be fighting. Without fighting, no marriage takes place in k■atriya family. K■■■a had 16,108
wives, and almost in each time He had to fight to gain the wife. It was a sporting. For k■atriya to fight, it
was a sporting. So he is perplexed whether this kind of fighting he should encourage or not.
There is a proverb in Bengal, kh■bo ki kh■bo n■ yadi kh■o tu pau■a: "When you are perplexed,
'Whether I shall eat or not eat,' better not eat." Sometimes we come to this point, "I am not very hungry.
Whether I shall eat or not eat?" The best course is not eat, not that you eat. But if you eat, then you can
eat in the month of December, Pau■a. Why? It is . . .
In Bengal . . . Bengal is tropical climate, but when it is winter season, it is advised that, "If you eat it is
not so harmful, because it will be digested." The night is very long, or the cold season, the digestive
power is nice. So when we are confused, "To do or not to do," j■bo ki j■bo n■ yadi j■o tu ■auce:
"When you think, 'Whether I shall go or not?' better don't go. But when it is a question of answering the
call of nature, you must go." J■bo ki j■bo n■ yadi j■u tu ■auce, kh■bo ki kh■bo n■ yadi kh■o tu
pau■e. These are very common sense.
Similarly, Arjuna is now perplexed, "Whether I shall fight or not fight?" That is also everywhere. When
there is declaration of war between the modern politicians, they consider . . . just like in the last, Second
World War, when Hitler was preparing for war . . . everyone knew that Hitler was going to retaliate,
because in the first war they became defeated. So Hitler was again preparing. One, my Godbrother,
German, he came in 1933 in India. So at that time he informed that "There must be war. Hitler is
preparing heavy preparation. War must be there." So at that time, I think, in your country the Prime
Minister was Mr. Chamberlain.
And he went to see Hitler to stop the war. But he would not. So similarly, in this fight, to the last point,
K■■■a tried to avoid the war. He proposed to Duryodhana that, "They are k■atriyas, your
cousin-brothers. You have usurped their kingdom. Never mind, you have taken some way or other. But
they are k■atriyas. They must have some means of livelihood. So give them, five brothers, five villages.
Out of the whole world empire, you give them five villages." So he . . . "No, I am not going to part with
even an inch of land without fight." Therefore, under such condition, the fight must be there.
So there is no question of Arjuna's considering whether he would fight or not. It is sanctioned by
K■■■a; so fight must be there. Just like when we were walking, the question was raised that, "Why
war takes place?" That is not a very difficult subject to understand, because every one of us has got a
fighting spirit. Even children fight, cats and dogs fight, birds fight, ants fight. We have seen it. So why
not human being? The fighting spirit is there. That is one of the symptoms of living condition: fighting.
So when that fighting should take place? Of course, at the present moment, by the ambitious politicians
they fight. But fighting, according to Vedic civilization, fighting means dharma-yuddha, on religious
principle. Not by whims of political ideas, "ism."
Just like now fighting is going on on two political groups, the Communist and the capitalist. They are
trying to avoid only fight, but the fighting is going on. As soon as America is in some field, immediately
Russia is also there. In the last fighting between India and Pakistan, as soon as President Nixon sent
their Seventh Fleet on the Indian Ocean, Bay of Bengal, almost in front of India . . . this was illegal. But
very puffed-up, America, so sent the Seventh Fleet, maybe to show sympathy the Pakistan. But
immediately our Russian friend also appeared there, therefore America had to come back. Otherwise, I
think America would have attacked on behalf of Pakistan.
So this is going on. Fighting you cannot stop. Many people, they are thinking how to stop war. That is
impossible. It is nonsense proposal. It cannot be. Because the fighting spirit is there in everyone. That
is a symptom of living entity. Even children, who has no politics, no enmity, they fight for five minutes;
again they are friends. So the fighting spirit is there. Now, how you should be utilized? Our K■■■a
consciousness movement is there. We say "consciousness." We don't say: "Stop fight" or "Do this, do
that, do that," no. Everything should be done in K■■■a consciousness. That is our propaganda.
Nirbandha-k■■■a-sambandhe (Bhakti-ras■m■ta-sindhu 1.2.255). Whatever you do, it must have
some relationship with the satisfaction of K■■■a. If K■■■a is satisfied, then you act. That is K■■■a
consciousness. K■■■endriya t■pti v■ñch■ t■ra n■ma prema (CC Adi 4.165). This is love. Just like
you love somebody; for the sake of your beloved, you can do anything. And we do sometimes.
Similarly, the same thing should be transferred to K■■■a. That's all.
Try to educate yourself how to love K■■■a and act for K■■■a only. This is the perfection of life. Sa
vai pu■s■■ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhok■aje (SB 1.2.6). Bhakti, bhakti means service,
bhaja-sev■y■m. The bhaja-dh■tu, it is used for the purpose of rendering service, bhaja. And bhaja,
there is Sanskrit grammar, kti-pratyaya, to make it noun. This is verb. So there are pratyayas, kti
pratyaya, ti pratyaya, many pratyayas. So bhaj-dh■tu kti, equal to bhakti.
So bhakti means to satisfy K■■■a. Bhakti cannot be applied to anyone else. If somebody says that, "I
am a great devotee of K■l■, Goddess K■l■," that is not bhakti; that is business. Because any demigod
you worship, there is some purpose behind that. Generally, people take to become a devotee of
Goddess K■l■ for eating meat. That is their purpose. In the Vedic culture, those who are meat-eaters,
they have been advised that, "Don't eat meat purchased from the slaughterhouse or from the market."
Actually, this system was never current anywhere, all over the world, that to maintain slaughterhouse.
This is latest invention.
We talk with sometimes with Christian gentlemen, and when we inquire that, "Lord Christ says: 'Thou
shall not kill', why you are killing?" they give evidence that, "Christ also ate meat sometimes."
Sometimes Christ ate meat, that's all right, but did Christ say that "You maintain big, big slaughterhouse
and go on eating meat?" There is no common sense even. Christ might have eaten. Sometimes he . . .
if there was no . . . nothing available for eating, what could you do? That is another question. In great
necessity, when there is no other food except taking meat . . .
That time is coming. In this age, Kali-yuga, gradually food grains will be reduced. It is stated in the
■r■mad-Bh■gavatam, Twelfth Canto. No rice, no wheat, no milk, no sugar will be available. One has
to eat meat. This will be the condition. And maybe to eat the human flesh also. This sinful life is
degrading so much so that they will become more and more sinful. T■n aham dvi■ata■ kr■r■n
k■■p■my ajasram andhe-yoni■u (BG 16.19). Those who are demons, those who are sinful, nature's
law is to place him in such condition that he will become more and more a demon, so that he will never
be able to understand what is God. This is nature's law. If you want to forget God, then God will put you
in such a condition that you can never understand what is God. That is demonic life.
That time is also coming. At the present moment, still a few men are interested what is God. Arto
arth■rt■ jijñ■su jñ■n■ (CC Madhya 24.95). But time is coming ahead when there will be no sense to
understand God. That is the last stage of Kali-yuga, and at that time Kalk■ avat■ra, Kalk■ avat■ra will
come. At that time there is no preaching of God consciousness, simply killing. Simply killing. Kalk■
avat■ra with His sword will simply massacre. Then again Satya-yuga will come. Again golden age will
come.
So this problem of fighting . . . we have to understand that fighting spirit is there in everyone. You
cannot check it; you cannot stop it. We do not say stop. The M■y■v■d■ philosopher says that, "You
stop this thing." But that is not possible. You cannot stop. Because you are living entity, you have got all
these propensities. How you can stop it? But it should be utilized properly. That's all.
You have got the fighting spirit. How to utilize it? Yes. Narottama d■sa ■h■kura recommends, krodha'
bhakta-dve■■-jane (Prema-bhakti-candrik■): "Those who are envious of God or God's devotee, you
can utilize your anger upon them." You can utilize. The anger you cannot give up. Our business is how
to utilize it. That is K■■■a consciousness. Everything has to be utilized. We do not say that, "You stop
this, stop that." No. You . . . K■■■a says, yat karo■i, yaj juhosi, yad a■n■si, yat tapasyasi kuru■va
tad mad-arpanam (BG 9.27). Yat karo■i. K■■■a does not say that "You do this, you do that." He says:
"Whatever you do, but the result should come to Me."
So here the position is that Arjuna is to fight not for himself, but he is only thinking in terms of himself.
He says, te avasthita■ pramukhe dh■rtar■■■r■■, y■n eva hatv■ na jij■vi■■mas (BG 2.6): "They
are my brothers, relatives. If they die . . . we do not wish to die. Now they are in my front. I have to kill
them?" So still he is thinking in terms of his own satisfaction. He is preparing the background—how
materialistic person, they think in the terms of personal satisfaction. So that has to be given up. Not
personal satisfaction; K■■■a's satisfaction. That is K■■■a consciousness. Whatever you do, it
doesn't matter, you have to test it whether you are doing it for K■■■a. That is your perfection. Not only
perfection, that is the perfection of your mission of human life.
This human life is meant for that purpose. Because less than human form, the animal life, they are
trained, perfection of sense gratification, personal satisfaction. They have no such feeling that "Other
animals also . . ." When there is some eatable, one dog, he will think, "How I can get it?" He will never
think how other dogs also will be able to take it. This is not animal nature. Animal nature means their
own satisfaction. There is no question of "My friend, my family member." Even . . . they do not share
even with their own children. You might have seen. If there is some foodstuff, the dog and the dog's
children, everyone is trying to take in his own side. This is animal. So when this thing is changed for
K■■■a, that is human life. That is the distinction between animal life.
So that is very difficult also. Therefore the whole education is there, Bhagavad-g■t■, how to teach
people, "Act for K■■■a, act for God, not for your personal interest. Then you'll be entangled."
Yajñ■rth■t karma anyatra karma ya■ bandhana■ (BG 3.9). Anything you do, it will produce some
reaction, and you are to enjoy or suffer that reaction. Anything you do. But if you do for K■■■a, there is
no more reaction. That is your freedom. yoga■ karmasu kau■alam (BG 2.50). That is stated in the
Bhagavad-g■t■. yoga, when you are in contact with K■■■a, that is the secret of success in this
material world, working. Otherwise, whatever you are doing, whatever you are working, it will produce
some reaction and you will have to enjoy or suffer.
So here again, the same thing. Arjuna is thinking in terms, na caitad vidma■ kataran no gar■yo (BG
2.6). So he is perplexed, "Which one, which side will be glorious? I shall stop fighting or not fighting?" In
the next verses it will be seen . . . when you are in such perplexity, what to do and what not to do, so in
order to get right direction, you must approach the spiritual master. That will be done in the next verse.
Arjuna will say that, "I do not know. I am now perplexed. Although I know it is my duty as k■atriya to
fight, still I am hesitating. I am hesitating in my duty. So therefore I am perplexed. So K■■■a, therefore
I submit to You." Formerly he was talking just like friend. Now he will be prepared to take lesson from
K■■■a.
So our the whole instruction of Bhagavad-g■t■ is that you should not act for yourself; you should
simply act for K■■■a. So even fighting for K■■■a, or even doing something still abominable for
K■■■a . . . just like the gop■s. The gop■s were captivated by K■■■a. K■■■a was a young boy, very
beautiful, and the gop■s were young girls. That is the superficial . . . actually, the gop■s are eternal
associates of K■■■a.
■nanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibh■vit■bhi■ (Bs. 5.37). They are expansions of K■■■a, K■■■a's
pleasure potency expansion. They are meant for K■■■a's pleasure. They are not ordinary women. But
superficially, just to teach us how to love K■■■a at the risk of anything . . . therefore gop■s, when they
were attracted by K■■■a at midnight . . . K■■■a was playing flute, and they became attracted and
they left home. Some of them were locked up. They gave up their life even. They were so much
attracted. Now this kind of behavior, if young girls . . . according to Vedic civilization, they cannot go out
from the protection of father, husband or brother. No, they cannot go. Especially at midnight.
So this was against Vedic principle. It is openly a kind of prostitution. But because it was done for
K■■■a, Lord Caitanya Mah■prabhu, He recommends, ramy■ k■cid up■san■ vraja-vadhubhi■
kalpit■ (Caitanya-manjusa): "There is no more better type of worship than it was conceived by the vraja
gop■s. Vraja-vadhu. The most abominable. For a young girl to leave the care of husband, father, and
go to another young boy, according to Vedic culture, it is the most abominable. So still, because it was .
. . the center was K■■■a, it is accepted as the highest type of worship. That is K■■■a consciousness.
We have to learn how to act only for K■■■a, how to love only K■■■a. Then our life is successful. And
the human life . . . because we have also come down from Vaiku■■ha some millions and millions of
years ago. An■di karama-phale (G■t■val■). An■di means before the creation. We living entities, we
are eternal. Even the creation is annihilated after millions and trillions of years, the living entities, they
are not annihilated. Na hanyate hanyam■ne ■ar■re (BG 2.20). They remain. So when this whole
cosmic manifestation will be annihilated, the living entities will remain in the body of Vi■■u. Then when
again another creation will take place, they will come out again to fulfill their desires.
The real desire is how to go to home, back to Godhead. So this chance is given. So if this chance is
misused . . . this life, human form of life, it is very, very risky. Again we will have to accept the cycle of
birth and death. Not only that; if we do not fulfill the mission of life, then again there will be annihilation
of the whole creation, and we will have to stay within the body of Vi■■u for millions and trillions of
years. Again we will have to come. So therefore it is called an■di karama-phale. An■di means "Before
the creation." This is going on. And to teach the befooled living entities, K■■■a personally comes.
K■■■a is very much anxious to take us back to home, back to Godhead, because we are part and
parcel of K■■■a. Suppose if your son is loitering in the street, are you not anxious, "Oh, there may be
some accident, and the poor boy will be killed"? So you go, try to find out. Similarly, K■■■a's position
is like that.
We are in this material world simply suffering, life after life. Du■kh■layam a■■■vatam (BG 8.15). This
place is miserable. But m■y■'s illusion, we are taking this miserable condition of life as happiness. This
is called m■y■. But it is . . . there is no happiness in this material world. Everything miserable. The
sooner we understand that everything is miserable in this material world, and the sooner we prepare
ourself to leave this material world and go back to home, back to . . . that is our sense. Otherwise,
whatever we are doing, we are simply being defeated. Because we are missing the aim. Na te vidu■
sv■rtha-gati■ hi vi■■um (SB 7.5.31). Dur■■ay■. We are, by hope against hope, which will never be
fulfilled, we are trying to adjust things here to become happy without God consciousness. It will never
be accompli . . . na te vidu■ sv■rtha-gati■ hi vi■■u■ dur■■ay■. Dur■■ay■ means "The hope which
will never be fulfilled."
So all these materialistic person, they are so fool, rascal, miscreants, they are increasing these material
activities. They are thinking by this increasing material activities they will be happy. No. That is not
possible. Dur■■ay■ ye . . . and their leaders . . . andh■ yath■ndhair upan■yam■n■s te
'p■■a-tantryam uru-d■mni baddh■■ (SB 7.5.31). All of us are tied very tight, hands and legs, and we
are thinking we are free, independent, by the laws of material nature. Still we are thinking that we are
independent. The scientist, they are trying to avoid God, independent by science. That is not possible.
We are under the grip of the material nature. Material nature means the agent of K■■■a.
May■dhyak■e■a prak■ti■ s■yate sa-car■caram (BG 9.10). Prak■te■ kriyam■■■ni gu■air karm■■i
sarva■a■ (BG 3.27).
So we are always in perplexity like Arjuna, what to do, what to, not to do. But if we take this principle
that, "We must do for K■■■a . . ." So take direction from K■■■a and take direction from K■■■a's
representative and you do it; then there is no karma-bandhana■. Karm■■i nirdaheti kintu ca
bhakti-bh■j■m (Bs. 5.54). Otherwise, we are bound up by the reaction of every act. We cannot get out.
So this perplexity, "Whether I shall fight or not fight," that will be explained that, "Yes, you must fight for
K■■■a. Then it is all right." K■ma■ k■■■a-karm■rpane.
Just like Hanum■n. He fought for Lord R■macandra. He did not fight for himself. Similarly, Arjuna also,
his flag is kapi-dhvaja; his flag is marked with Hanum■n. He knew that. So Hanum■n, a great fighter,
fought with R■va■a not for his personal interest. The interest was how to get out S■t■j■ from the
hands of R■va■a, kill the whole family, and get out and let her sit down on the side of R■macandra.
This is the policy of Hanum■n, devotees. And the R■va■a policy is: "Take away S■t■ from the
clutches of R■ma and enjoy it." This is R■va■a policy. And the Hanum■n policy is, "Take out S■t■
from the hands of R■va■a and get her seated by the side of R■ma." The same S■t■. S■t■ means
Lak■m■. So Lak■m■ means N■r■ya■a's property, God's property.
So we should learn the policy that all these materialistic persons, R■va■as, they are trying to enjoy
God's property. So some way or other . . . of course, we cannot fight with R■va■a-class man. We are
not so strong. Therefore we have taken the policy of becoming a beggar, "Sir, you are so nice man.
Please give us something. Give us something. Because you are spoiling your life by keeping God's
property, you are going to hell. So some way or other, if you become a member, so you will be saved.
You will be saved." That is our policy. We are not beggar. But it is a policy.
Now it is not very . . . we are not very strong to fight with the R■va■a—otherwise, we have taken all the
money by fighting. But that is not possible. We are not so strong. Therefore we have taken the policy of
beggar.
Thank you very much.
Devotees: All glories . . . (cut) (end)
