Pradyumna: O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo
bhagavate v■sudev■ya. (Prabhup■da and devotees repeat) (leads chanting of verse)
(break)
sa■kara■—such unwanted children; narak■ya—for hellish life; eva—certainly; kula-ghn■n■m—of
those who are killers of the family; kulasya—of the family; ca—also; patanti—fall down;
pitara■—forefathers; hi—certainly; e■■m—of them; lupta—stopped; pi■■a—offerings; udaka—water;
kriy■■—performance.
Translation: "When there is increase of unwanted population, a hellish situation is created both for the
family and for those who destroy the family tradition. In such corrupt families, there is no offering of
oblations of food and water to the ancestors."
Prabhup■da: Sa■karo narak■yaiva. When there are unwanted children, then the family tradition, the
family obligation, they are all forgotten. At the present moment, nobody knows that after death there is
life, and still such life is connected with the family, the forefathers and the descendants. Nothing of this
science is known at the present moment.
More or less, exactly like animals. That's all. As animal has no such feelings or connection—simply the
number of days he will live, he will eat, sleep, have sex life and die, that's all. This subtle regulation of
family connection is unknown at the present moment, and still they are very much proud of
advancement of knowledge.
So unwanted children, as we have discussed in the previous . . . pradu■yanti kula-striya■ (BG 1.40). If
the woman, kula-striya■, family . . . family woman and prostitute are different. Still in India, the
uncontrolled women, or there is a class of prostitutes, they are not family women. But kula-striya■,
family women, they have got so many obligations. There is a verse that svarg■pta-k■ma-mok■■ya
dhar■ samprati hetav■.
Dhar■ means wife. Wife can help one to be elevated to the heavenly planets, and dharm■rtha-k■ma,
to become helpful in the matter of advancement in religious and spiritual knowledge: dharma; artha,
economic development; k■ma, satisfying the husband for sense gratification; dharma artha k■ma; and
mok■a also, also for salvation.
The wife is so important. If there is chaste wife, she can help the husband in these four principles of life,
dharma artha k■ma mok■■ya, dhar■ samprati hetut■ (SB 4.8.41, CC ■di 1.90). If we can train up
nice wife, or the society trains the girls to become nice wife, she becomes a great source of energy to
the husband. dharma-artha-k■ma-mok■■ya dhar■ sampra . . . and if they are polluted, they become
source of the sa■kara, var■a-sa■kara.
The exact example of var■a-sa■kara is the hippies at the present moment, all over the world, not only
in the Western countries but in India also. So the population, hippie population, means sa■kara
population. So increase of such population means narak■yaiva, naraka, hellish, hellish condition of life
in this life, also in the next life. At that time, to live . . . actually we have practically seen in recent year,
especially in Calcutta, it has become a hellish life. The population, the younger generation, is so
polluted, so contaminated, that you cannot safely walk in the street. Anywhere, the young boys they
can encircle you and rob you. You cannot say. The police cannot help, the government cannot help. So
these unwanted children, without being trained up in the var■■■rama system, they become the cause
of hellish life in this life, also after death.
After death, according to Vedic regulation, pi■■a-udaka, pi■■a, offering Vi■■u pras■dam and water
at least once in a year, it is required by the family members. In . . . according to Vedic culture, there is
one month fixed up in a year when all people will offer pi■■a and udaka to the forefathers. Tarpana.
Tarpana. Week or fortnight, for one fortnight. So the idea is that if the forefather in that family has not
achieved a proper life . . . sometimes, due to sinful activities, too much attachment, a man becomes
ghost. Ghost . . .
There is ghosts: bh■ta preta pi■■ca. Not only this life, demonic life, but after death also there are
ghostly life. They do not get this gross body. They remain in the subtle body—mind, intelligence and
ego. Due to their gross sinful life, they are punished by not getting a gross life. Because without getting
a gross life, we cannot enjoy. With mind, I cannot enjoy rasagull■. I must have the tongue, I must have
the hand, fingers, I can pick up, then . . . in the mind, I may think of eating or collecting rasagull■, but
actually I do not get the taste.
So gross body is required, because every living entity in this material world, they have come to enjoy.
K■■■a bhuliy■ j■va bhoga v■ñch■ kare p■■■te m■y■ t■re j■pa■iy■ dhare (Prema-vivarta 6.2).
This is the beginning of our material life. When we forget to render service to K■■■a, immediately we
get a material body offered by the material nature.
So this gross body is required for enjoyment. Spirit, spiritual body is also very subtle, and the astral
body, or subtle body, is also very subtle. The gross body required. So on account of one's severe sinful
life, he does not get this gross body.
Therefore the lupta-pi■■odaka-kriy■■ (BG 1.41). Taking for granted that some of my forefathers have
become ghostly life and has not got the gross body, so by this pi■■odaka . . . pi■■a means offering
pras■dam of Vi■■u pras■dam. Still in India there is a place, Gay■. There is Vi■■u temple, and it is a
custom, all Hindus . . . nowadays, they do not go. They do not believe even. They have given up
everything. Due to unwanted children, they don't care for it, what is family, what is pi■■a-udaka. Simply
eat, drink, be merry and enjoy, that's all. But you see five thousand years, Arjuna . . . Arjuna was not a
br■hmi■, neither a sanny■s■. A g■hastha, householder, and a . . . in royal order. He's on the
battlefield. He's not a Ved■ntist. But just see how his knowledge is perfect.
This is Vedic culture. One may not be a br■hma■a . . . Br■hma■a is very advanced. Satya ■ama
dama titik■a (BG 18.42). But even k■atriyas, they are also so advanced, so advanced we can see that
he is hearing Bhagavad-g■t■ from K■■■a in the battlefield. How much time you can spare in the
battlefield? The talk took place between the two soldiers when he was just going to throw his arrow.
■■stra sampate. Just was going to . . . he became very compassionate: "K■■■a, I have to kill my own
kinsmen." And he's describing. He's describing, "What kind of sinful activities I am going to do." So just
try to understand how much people were advanced. These Bhagavad-g■t■ talks took place between
K■■■a and Arjuna in the battlefield, just on the verge of his beginning the battle. So how much time he
could spare? Utmost, half an hour. Not more than that.
So within half an hour, this Bhagavad-g■t■ was taught to K■■■a (Arjuna), and he could understand it,
and then agreed to fight: "Yes," na■■o moha■ sm■tir labdh■, kari■ye vacana■ tava (BG 18.73). How
much advanced he was in education and learning, just imagine. At the present moment they are
reading Bhagavad-g■t■ years after years, big, big scholars, big, big theologicians and . . . but they
cannot understand. After reading Bhagavad-g■t■, they are accusing K■■■a as immoral.
One professor in Oxford University, he is a student or professor of Bhagavad-g■t■, has written book.
Now his conclusion is that K■■■a is immoral. That means he could not understand Bhagavad-g■t■.
Bhagavad-g■t■ cannot be understood by any demon or third-class man. That is explained in the
Bhagavad-g■t■. K■■■a said to Arjuna that, "I am speaking to you the same Bhagavad-g■t■, science
of God, which I spoke millions of years ago to the sun-god, because the parampar■ is lost, and I have
picked up you because," bhakto 'si me priyo 'si me (BG 4.3), "you are very dear friend and bhakta."
So Bhagavad-g■t■ is not meant for the demons or the abhaktas. The first condition is that he must be
a devotee of K■■■a. Then it will be revealed. Otherwise it is not possible. N■ha■ prak■■a■ sarvasya
yoga-m■y■-sam■v■ita■ (BG 7.25). Na m■■ du■k■tino m■■h■ prapadyante nar■dham■■ (BG
7.15). These things are there. So if one is devotee of K■■■a, he can understand Bhagavad-g■t■ very
easily. Just like Arjuna understood within half an hour. Others, they cannot understand. In one sense,
the people at that time were so educated, advanced, that they could talk about the Absolute Truth and
understand within half an hour, one hour. There was no need of books in those days. People were so
sharp-memoried, once heard from the spiritual master, they'll never forget. With the advancement of
Kali, so many things will reduce. One of them is the memory will be reduced. People will be weaker.
There will be no more mercy. The brain will not be so powerful or sharp. These things are described. So
we cannot even imagine what kind of brain Arjuna possessed.
Another thing, this Bhagavad-g■t■ is part of Mah■bh■rata. And the Mah■bh■rata was written for
str■-■■dra-dvija-bandh■n■■ trayi na ■ruti-gocar■■ (SB 1.4.25). Str■, woman, str■, ■■dra and
dvija-bandhu. Dvija-bandhu means a person born in high family, br■hma■a, k■atriya, vai■ya, at least
br■hma■a, k■atriya, but he's not qualified br■hma■a or k■atriya. He's called dvija-bandhu, the friend
of the twice-born. The br■hma■a, k■atriya, vai■ya, they are twice-born. One birth is father and
mother; another birth is by the spiritual master, by Vedic knowledge. The Vedic knowledge is mother
and the spiritual master is the father. So the second birth. Therefore, they are called dvija, twice-born.
So dvija-bandh■n■m, those who are not actually twice-born but born in the family of dvijas. Therefore
they are called dvija-bandhu, "not dvija; friends of the dvijas." Dvija-bandhu. One may become a friend
of the dvija. One may become a son of a high-court judge, but that does not mean he is high-court
judge. But now they are taking, "Because my father is br■hma■a, therefore I am br■hma■a." No. That
was not accepted. Your father may be br■hma■a, but if you are not qualified a br■hma■a, you cannot
be called a br■hma■a. You can be called dvija-bandhu.
So this Mah■bh■rata was written, str■-■■dra-dvija-bandh■n■■ trayi na ■ruti gocar■■ (SB 1.4.25).
Woman and dvija-bandhu and the ■■dras, it is very difficult for them to understand the Vedic literature
direct, because they have no advanced knowledge or education. Therefore the same thing. The Vedic
knowledge was described in the Mah■bh■rata. Because it is history. Everyone is interested to read
history. So through history the Vedic knowledge was imparted. Therefore Mah■bh■rata is called the
fifth Vedas. There are four Vedas: Sama, Yajur, ■k, Atharva. And Mah■bh■rata is fifth Veda. They are
meant for this stri, ■■dra, dvija-bandhu. So Bhagavad-g■t■ is within the Mah■bh■rata.
So actually it was meant for the less intelligent class of men. But, at the present moment, the highest
intelligent class of men cannot understand. Just see the difference. Formerly, five thousand years, this
was meant for the less intelligent class of men, and we have deteriorated so much that the so-called
highest intelligent class of men cannot understand this Bhagavad-g■t■. And he is posted as the
professor in the Oxford University. So this class of men are leading the society. The third-class,
fourth-class men, they are leaders. Andh■ yath■ndhair upan■yam■n■■ (SB 7.5.31). So now we are
talking with so many big, big person, guests, coming daily. But actually, we can see how much the
third-class, fourth-class men, practically blind, they are leading the society. That we can understand.
Therefore, the social order is . . . just like Arjuna is describing here, sa■karo narak■yaiva
kula-ghn■n■■ kulasya ca (BG 1.41). Who knows this? Who knows this science, that sa■karo
narak■yaiva, if you produce unwanted children, irresponsible children, then the whole world will be in
hellish condition? Who is caring for that? The world is in hellish condition, we can perceive, but they are
trying in a different way. They want to remain demons; at the same time, they want to become leader.
So at the present moment, comparing the social status five thousand years ago . . . according Darwin's
theory, five thousand years ago men were uncivilized. Uncivilized. Now this literature is written by
uncivilized men. Just see. So highly intellectual writings, they were uncivilized. Now they have become
civilized. That is Darwin's theory. We are not making progress.
So Arjuna said that patanti pitaro hy e■■■ lupta-pi■■odaka-kriy■■ (BG 1.41). Pi■■odaka. In
Calcutta, there was a big scientist. His name was Sarpisirat. He was speaking in a . . . he was atheist
number one; he was speaking that, "This pi■■odaka, by offering pi■■a, pras■dam and water, if it
goes to my forefather, so just give me to eat downstairs, whether I can eat upstairs." This reasoning.
But he does not know that how much there are different types of eating. They do not know there is
eating in the subtle body also. The ghosts also, they eat, but the method is different. So even a big
scientist speak like that, then how the ordinary people . . .? Yad yad ■carati ■re■■ha■, lokas tad
anuvartate (BG 3.21). If the so-called advanced in education they speak so irresponsibly, naturally,
others will follow.
Therefore, at the present moment, the whole generation is covered with ignorance and darkness. No
clear knowledge. And without clear knowledge, whatever we do . . . just like in darkness, whatever we
act, that is simply embezzlement. That's all. It is not very correctly understood. Therefore we have no
correct knowledge, no correct activities, and . . . and the result is narakayaiva.
(aside) So you can read next verse.
Pradyumna:
(break)
do■ai■ — by such faults; etai■ — all these; kula-ghn■n■m — of the destroyers of the family;
var■a-sa■kara — of unwanted children; k■rakai■ — which are causes; uts■dyante — are devastated;
j■ti-dharm■■ — community projects; kula-dharm■■ — family traditions; ca — also; ■■■vat■■ —
eternal
Translation: "Due to the evil deeds of the destroyers of family tradition, all kinds of community projects
and family welfare activities are devastated."
Prabhup■da: So j■ti-dharma. J■ti, nowadays it has been taken as "national," but here, j■ti-dharma
means . . . just like one is born in br■hma■a j■ti, k■atriya j■ti, vai■ya j■ti, ■■dra j■ti. So each j■ti,
they have got different types of responsibilities. So when the unwanted children, irresponsible children,
they do not follow any more the tradition, the family tradition, or j■ti-dharma, so they create a class of
population in the var■a-sa■kara. So everything becomes topsy-turvy, hellish condition.
And actually it has so happened. Now there is no more j■ti-dharma. Everyone is engaged somehow or
other to fill up the belly. Formerly, formerly there was stricture. The br■hma■a, the k■atriyas, and the
vai■yas, these three higher castes, there were certain restrictions. The br■hma■a would not do this or
the br■hma■a must do this. So that is called j■ti-dharma. A br■hma■a cannot accept service from
anywhere. I have discussed many times. A k■atriya also cannot. And vai■ya cannot. Only the ■■dras
can become servant of other. Paricary■tmaka■ karma ■■drasy■pi svabh■va-jam (BG 18.44).
So at the present moment, nobody can observe the strict rules and regulations, that "I am born in a
br■hma■a family. I cannot accept anyone's service." Then you will have to starve. Because he has no
brahminical capacity . . . by education, by culture, he's a ■■dra, although falsely he's claiming that he
is a br■hma■a or a k■atriya. So his j■ti-dharma, family tradition, family rituals, everything is lost due to
this unwanted children. Unwanted children make everything topsy-turvy.
So Arjuna is visualizing all the future calamities. But there is one remedy. It is a fact that j■ti-dharma we
have lost. No more we can be called strictly following the j■ti-dharma. No more can present himself
strictly as a br■hma■a or k■atriya. Everything is lost now, by the influence of Kali-yuga, and
var■a-sa■kara. So there is only one remedy. Only one remedy. That is stated in
■r■mad-Bh■gavatam, Eleventh Canto:
We must admit that we have created hellish condition of society by producing unwanted children and
disobeying the j■ti-dharma or kula-dharma. That one has to admit, everyone. So what is the remedy?
Only remedy is to surrender to K■■■a. K■■■a also says . . . K■■■a is canvassing, that "Even you
can give up your j■ti-dharma, but simply surrender unto Me. I shall give you protection."
There is another verse in the ■r■mad-Bh■gavatam: tyaktv■ sva-dharm■n cara■■mbuja■ harer (SB
1.5.17). Sva-dharma. Sva-dharma means j■ti-dharma. So I may be born in . . . a br■hma■a or
k■atriya, so I have got sva-dharma. A k■atriya or br■hma■a has got his own regulative principle. So
Bh■gavata, N■rada says, Bh■gavata says and N■rada says that if one has given up his j■ti-dharma .
. . because K■■■a is asking: sarva-dharm■n parityajya (BG 18.66). Sarva-dharma means this
sva-dharma, j■ti-dharma, or so many other dharmas man created for the nice keep-up of the society,
just like we create even in the modern world so many rules and regulation. Take for example that one
must keep to the left. Just to keep order in the society, there are so many things.
So j■ti-dharma, kula-dharma is also like that. Spiritually, it has no value. It . . . it can help one to be
elevated on the spiritual platform. But spiritual advancement does not depend on this j■ti-dharma or
kula-dharma. It does not depend. Even without following the rules and regulations of j■ti-dharma and
kula-dharma one can become advanced in spiritual life. Ahaituk■ apratihat■. If one is serious to
become K■■■a conscious, then all these material impediments cannot check him. Anyone can
become. Sat, sat ■va-paco . . . there is a . . . what is called? mantra-tantra-vi■■rada.
mantra-tantra-vi■■rada, avai■■avo gurur na sy■t, vaisnava■ ■va-paco guru■ (Padma Pur■■a).
Mantra-tantra-vi■■rada: one is very expert in j■ti-dharma, but if he's not a Vai■■ava, if he's not a
devotee of Lord Vi■■u . . .
Vai■■ava means visnur yasya devat■, one who has accepted . . . there are many demigods, devat■.
So sometimes they are advised that "If you want this result, then you worship this demigod." Just like it
is said that if you want a beautiful wife, so you worship Um■. Um■, the wife of Lord ■iva, she is very
beautiful. So similarly, if you want learning, then you worship such and such demigod. If you want
money, then you worship such and such demigod. These are there, I mean to say, orders in the Vedic
literature. But if you want to get relief from this material condition of life, then you have to take to shelter
of Vi■■u, Vai■■ava. Or the ■■stra says even if you have got other desires to fulfill, still you become
Vai■■ava. That is the last instruction. You don't require to worship other demigods. In the
Bhagavad-g■t■ also it is said, k■mais tais tair h■ta-jñ■n■■ yajanty anya-devat■ (BG 7.20). If one is
bewildered on account of lusty desires, they go to different demigods for begging some benefit.
So they are h■ta-jñ■na. H■ta-jñ■na means lost of intelligence. If K■■■a is the Supreme, so suppose
if you want some material happiness, can He not give you? He can give you also. So why should you
bother about other demigods? Therefore it is said, k■mais tais tair h■ta-jñ■na. If K■■■a is the
Supreme Lord, so if I have got some desires, material desires . . . actual bhakti means minus all
material . . . any■bhil■■it■-■■nyam (Bhakti-ras■m■ta-sindhu 1.1.11). One must be free from all
material desires. But even if you have got some material desire, still you can take shelter of K■■■a.
You don't require to take shelter of other demigods. So that is the last instruction in the Vedic literature.
Ak■ma means devotee. Devotees have no desire. They have got desire just to become devotee of
K■■■a. That is natural desire. If the son desires that, "I shall be obedient son of my father," that is
natural desire. Or the son desires that, "I shall depend on my father, and I shall be happy," that kind of
desire is natural desire. Similarly, if one desires that, "I shall become a devotee of Lord K■■■a," that is
natural desire. But when I desire to lord it over the material nature and forget my service to K■■■a,
that is called v■san■. That is material desire, abhil■■a. So we have to give up this material desire.
Then it is bhakti. Any■bhil■■it■-■■nya■ jñ■na■ karm■dy an■vrtam anuk■lyena k■■■a . . .
(Bhakti-ras■m■ta-sindhu 1.1.11).
So even if we have violated the j■ti-dharma and kula-dharma . . . that is a fact. We have done so.
There is no denying this fact. Every one of us, we have done that. Then what is the next duty or
remedy? Because we have violated everything. So that, for that purpose, in the Bh■gavata gives you
direction. Here is the verse: devar■i-bh■t■pta■ n■■■■ pit■■■m (SB 11.5.41). Pit■, pit■
pi■■odaka-kriy■■. So we are obliged to offer pi■■a and water to the pit■s. But here is an . . . what is
called, outlet. Devar■i. We are indebted to the devat■s. ■■is, we are indebted to the great sages.
Devar■i, deva r■i bh■t■n■m. We are indebted to so many other living entities, bh■t■n■m; and
n■■■■, we are also indebted to the human society. N■■■■, pit■■■m. We are indebted to the pit■s,
forefathers. Pit■■■m.
So na ki■kar■ n■yam ■■■ ca r■jan. One becomes free from the servitude of all these personalities,
devarsi-bh■t■pta n■■■■ pit■■■m (SB 11.5.41). How he can become? Sarv■tm■ ya■ ■ara■a■
■ara■yam: one who has fully surrendered unto the lotus feet of the Lord, ■ara■yam. ■ara■yam
means here is the real place where one can surrender fully. Others, if I surrender to a cats and dogs,
what he will help me? Therefore they are not ■ara■yam. But, by mistake, if they take shelter of such
cats and dog, what benefit they will get? Therefore ■ara■yam, the worthwhile surrender, is to the lotus
feet of Mukunda. Therefore it is said, sarv■tm■ ya■ ■ara■a■ ■ara■ya■ gato mukunda■ parih■tya
kartum (SB 11.5.41). We have got so many duties, but in this age, we have lost everything. Therefore,
our only duty is to surrender unto the lotus feet of Mukunda, K■■■a. That will save us.
K■■■a says—it is not story—K■■■a says, aha■ tv■■ sarva p■pebhyo mok■ayi■y■mi (BG 18.66).
"I know that you have violated your family tradition, your past regulations, everything you have done for
which you are to be punished, sinful activities. But I give you an assurance, if you surrender unto Me,
then aha■ tv■■ sarva-p■pebhyo mok■ayi■y■mi, I shall give you deliverance from the all reaction of
sinful activities."
Therefore at the present moment, because we have lost all culture, we have done so many sinful
activities, if we want to be saved, it is . . . the only remedy is to surrender to the lotus feet of K■■■a,
and thus become saved.
Thank you very much.
Devotees: All glories to ■r■la Prabhup■da . . . (cut) (end)
