(Hindi translated into English)
Prabhupada: If you want, there is no power in this world that can be an impediment to your engaging in
devotional service.
So if someone is engaged in pure devotional service then the soul is very blissful. That is why the Lord
says, j■âna te 'hasa-vij■ânam, "the knowledge that I am imparting to you, it is not impersonal Brahman
realization. This is Bhagavan realization." Impersonal Brahman realization, that is for liberation. And
this knowledge that the Lord is imparting is for the liberated, for those who are already liberated. That is
why He says, j■âna te 'hasa-vij■ânam, along with scientific knowledge. sa-vij■ânam means . . .
(indistinct) . . . practical application or practical knowledge, not just theoretical. Having just theoretical
knowledge, aham brahmâsmi, this is knowledge that, I am not a material substance, I am not this
material body, I am Brahman. Brahma-bhitaprasannâtmâ, if we have this Brahman realization, the soul
is definitely blissful because all the miseries are due to our material knowledge. Till we go on accepting
a material body we will always be full of anxiety. Prahlada Mah■r■ja has said:
'Till we have this material body we will always be, samudvigna, full of anxiety. Once we come into the
realm of knowledge this anxiety will be destroyed. If this anxiety is destroyed but we do not advance!
Just like if a man is suffering from fever and the fever subsides, but the fact that the fever has subsided
does not mean that his body is disease free. Only if he gets out of the bed, walks around, eats properly
and feels good only then can we say that he is healthy. Just the fever subsiding is not the goal.
Similarly if we just acquire knowledge, aham brahmâsmi, I am Brahman, I am not this material body,
this is not sufficient knowledge. That is why the Lord says, bah■nâ janmanâm ante j■ânavân
mâprapadyate, one who is in possession of knowledge, this kind of devotional service is obtained after
many many births, bah■nâ janmanâm ante j■ânavân mâprapadyate, to surrender at the lotus feet of
the Lord- that is real knowledge. With just knowledge we may be blissful, but 'till we surrender at the
lotus feet of the Lord, the knowledge is not complete, this is according to the scriptures. That is why it is
said in the Bhagavad-g■t■:
Those who have acquired knowledge and are joyful, that I am not material, aha brahmâsmi, So'ham
this is all right but if you do not advance, then you will fall down. Then you will fall down from the realm
of knowledge. This is an injunction of the scriptures.
O lotus-eyed one, those who think themselves liberated falsely, mâninas, they are not actually
liberated, it will take time to be so, but they falsely assume themselves to be liberated—" I am now
liberated". mukta-mâninas, their intelligence is still not purified. Why? Tvayy asta-bhâvâd, because they
have not searched out your lotus feet. That is why the Lord says, j■âna te 'ha? Sa-vij■ânam,
sa-vij■ânam, practical application: j■âna te 'ha sa-vij■ânamidavakaúe.
"Now, I shall now speak to you. Arjuna, I shall now tell you about the real knowledge along with the
practical knowledge. "Yaj j■âtvâ, if you have this real knowledge, devotional knowledge. It is said in the
Vedas also: yasmin vij■âte sarvam evavij■âtabhavati.
If you understand God then you automatically have knowledge of everything. We are preaching in the
West, where big scientists, psychologists come to meet. But we prove it to them that the knowledge
they have is incomplete. Although we are not scientists or psychologists but by the mercy of God, we
can do this and we are doing this. I have a disciple Dr. Swarup Damodar. He is a great scientist in
chemistry. He has written a book, "Scientific Basis of K■■■a Consciousness." What I mean is although
he is a recognized scientist but still by acquiring this devotional knowledge he is making himself more
competent and he is writing many more books. This is practical knowledge. Devotional knowledge is
practical knowledge, j■âna te 'ha sa-vij■ânam idavakaúe—"I am giving you complete knowledge." Yaj
j■âtvâ, if you are able to understand this then, na iha bh■yaanyat, j■âtavyam avaúi There is no need
for you to acquire any other knowledge after this. So this practical knowledge, that is theoretical
knowledge along with practical knowledge, this is devotional service. The Lord will explain further on,
these are all matters related to devotional service only, as to how to use practical knowledge to
increase our attachment for the Lord. This is there in the beginning of this chapter.
So this yoga that is devotional service is the one that includes practical knowledge. Devotional service
is not a sentiment. Devotional service is with practical knowledge.
Just like Rupa Goswami has said:
Sruti, the Vedas and sm the Puranas and pa■carâtriki viddhi- if all these are given up and one is
engaged in devotional service, that devotional service is according to Rupa Goswami a disturbance
(utpâtâ). You understand, disturbance? It is not pure devotional service, it merely creates a disturbance
in the society. So vij■ânam.
So when the Lord himself is talking about devotional service He gives the example of Vedanta sutra.
So in the path of devotional service, sruti-sm according to the scriptural injunctions we should engage
in devotional service. That is why to guide us Srila Rupa Goswami has written the book, Bhakti-rasâm
(Nectar of Devotion). This we have translated into English, Nectar of Devotion. This Nectar of Devotion
is a textbook in many of the western universities. So sa-vij■ânam, vij■ânam you understand. So this
devotional service is not a sentiment it is scientific, saints accept it, âcâryas accept it. Acârya-upâsanâ,
without worshipping the âcâryas, it is difficult to understand devotional service. That is why Narottam
Das Thakur says, ei chay gosai jar—mui tar das ta-sabara pada-renu mora panca-gras, that, when we
follow in the footsteps of the six Goswamis- Sri Rupa, Sanatana, Bhatta Raghunath, Jiva, Gopal Bhatta,
Raghunath Das, tadera carana-sebi-bhakta-sane bas, to follow in the footsteps of the they who
discovered Vrindavana, the six Goswamis, we should serve them and bhakta-sane bas, we should
associate with the devotees, only then can we understand this science. Just like there is a society for
the business, similarly for engaging in devotional service we should definitely associate with the saintly
persons—âdau úraddhâ tatasâdhu-sa who is a saint? bhajate mâm ananya-bhâk, one who know
nothing other than to be engaged in the devotional service of the Lord. He is a saint! So this is called
sa-vij■ânam. Then the Lord says:
We need to understand the Lord as He is. Lord means, Lord Úri K■■■a root, K■■■as tu bhagavân
svayam, and Lord is everything but the main Lord is govindam âdi-purusam, govindam âdi-purusam.
And all the incarnations of the Lord, râmâdi m■rttikalâ-niyamena ti Râma, Varâha etc. The Lord has
many incarnations, they are all the Lord. It is not that K■■■a is âdi-purus so He is the biggest. All the
Lords are big. The Lord is not big or small. Just like in the case of tulsi we can see small and big leaves
but the work done by all them is the same. You can offer the small tulsi leaf at the lotus feet of the Lord
and a big leaf at the lotus feet of the Lord, the work done is the same. Similarly the Lord has many
incarnations, advaitam acyutam anâdim ananta-r■pam.
So the Lord's potencies are all one, even the holy name is the incarnation of the Lord. This Hare
K■■■a name is the "sound" incarnation of the Lord. This has been told by Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
Nâmnâm akâri bahudhânija-sarva-saktis. The holy name of the Lord has all the potencies of the Lord in
it. This has been told by Caitanya Mahaprabhu (it is not that), the Hare K■■■a names that we chant, is
K■■■a himself in the form of His name. That is why Caitanya Mahaprabhu says: nâmnâm akâri
bahudhânija-sarva-úaktis tatrârpitâ niyamitasmarana kâla.
This arc■-vigraha of the Lord needs to be worshipped at certain times, certain rules are to be followed,
but to chant the names of the Lord there is no rule! niyamitasmarana kâla Everyone can do it,
whenever and wherever you want to do it happily, that is the mercy of the Lord in this Kaliyuga, kirtanâd
eva kmukta-sa para vrajet
Sukadeva Goswami says that this Kaliyuga is an ocean of faults, kaler dorâjann, asti hy eko mahân gu
Despite being an ocean of faults there is one great benediction. What is that? Kirtanâd eva k- when we
chant the name Hare K■■■a the ill effects of this age of Kaliyuga are destroyed and we go back to
Vaikuntha dhama, mukta-sa para vrajet. So in this Kaliyuga the holy name is foremost.
So the Lord says that this acquiring of knowledge is not for everyone, manuâ sahasre
j■âna,vij■âna—what is that? Devotional knowledge. Knowledge means, just like Vedas, Vedas mean
knowledge. So the Lord says, vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedya.
After acquiring knowledge of the Vedas and other scriptures if one does not acquire devotional
knowledge about the Lord then it is only a wasted effort, srama eva hi kevalam. This is a scriptural
injunction. The scriptures say:
We have rehearsed all the Vedas and the knowledge in it, and read all the scriptures but if we have not
acquired devotional knowledge then it is only a wasted effort, hard work for nothing. This is a scriptural
injunction. Faith, faith means the faith of a brâhman, khatriya, vaisya—they are all different but the goal
is to acquire knowledge about the Lord, engage in devotional service, svanudharmasya, sahari-to.
This is perfection, what is that perfection? Perform your respective occupational duties but the motive
behind it should be hari—to how to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Sahari—so these are
scriptural injunctions. So how to please the Lord—to this is disclosed by the Lord himself, manu
sahasrekascid yatati siddhaye.
What is that perfection? Not the yogic perfection. Devotees of the Lord do not attempt yogic perfection
because the Lord himself is, yogesvara. He is the master of all mystic powers. So those who are
surrendered at the lotus feet of the Lord, all these mystic yogic perfections are automatically attained by
them. There is no need for any separate endeavors. Those who are under the protection of the Lord
and the Lord himself is yogesvara, so all the work done by the mystic yogic perfections is automatically
gained, tenityâbhiyuktânâ, yoga-k vahâmy aham.
This is according to the scriptures. The mystic yogic perfection is achieved by the mercy of the Lord.
This is practical, we can see this practically. This hari kirtan, kirtan movement which is happening all
over the world is astonishing because every year all over the world around ten deities are being
installed. This is also a kind of yogic perfection. So yogic perfection, we do not know any yogic
perfection but the Lord is yogesvara, and it is by His mercy that all this is possible. So the devotees of
the Lord do not want yogic perfection but because they are surrendered to yogesvara, they naturally
attain yogic perfection. So this yogic perfection comes naturally to them. It is said in the
Bhagavad-g■t■, Yatra yogesvara hari, where there is yogesvara, Hari and where there is yogesvara
hari, K■■■a and where there is a devotee like Arjuna, there all perfection exists. There is no need for
any separate endeavor.
Even if one acquires yogic perfection and all such kinds of other perfections, even then one will not be
able to understand the Absolute Truth. The Supreme Absolute Truth can be understood only by a
devotee of the Lord and by one who has received the mercy of the Lord.
So this K■■■a Consciousness movement that I am preaching all over the world, this is knowledge of
the Absolute Truth. That is why it is named "K■■■a Consciousness" (K■■■a Bhavanamrta). And this
K■■■a Bhavanamrta is possible if you develop attachment for this deity form of Lord K■■■a . That is
why these temples are established that you all come, see the Lord, hear His pastimes, then slowly by
âdau úraddhâ tatasâdhu-sa by these processes you will get attached to the Lord and that is the
perfection of life.
Thank you very much. Hare K■■■a.
Jaya Srila Prabhupada ki jaya! Haribol!
