Pradyumna: (leads chanting of verse) (Prabhup■da and devotees repeat)
(break)
Translation: "O Jan■rdana, although these men, overtaken by greed, see no fault in killing one's family
or quarreling with friends, why should we, with knowledge of the sin, engage in these acts?"
Prabhup■da: So other party, Duryodhana's party, they were not considering all these pious or impious,
sinful or vicious activities. Because lobha-upahata-cetasa■: "They have lost their sense on account of
greediness for acquiring the empire." When one becomes lusty or overpowered by greediness, then he
loses all intelligence. There are many places stated that. K■mais tais tair h■ta-jñ■n■■ yajanti
anya-devat■■ (BG 7.20).
K■■■a says that, "Those who are worshipers of other demigods . . ." Actually worshipful is the
Supreme Lord, K■■■a. Others, they should be shown respect. But worship means for the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. He is worshipful. ■ara■yam. He is to be taken shelter of; He is to be
worshiped. That is being taught. That is religion. Man-man■ bhava mad-bhakto mad-y■j■ m■■
namaskuru (BG 18.65). Always thinking of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, worshiping Him,
offering Him obeisances, that is K■■■a consciousness movement. The Deity room, offering
obeisances, worshiping, chanting, dancing, always be engaged to offer respect and submission to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is the duty of everyone.
Because all living entities are by constitution eternal servant. That is their healthy position. So long they
remain servant of the Supreme, that is healthy. Same example I have given many times, that my part
and parcel of the body, this finger, so long it is fit to give service to the body, it is healthy. If it cannot
give service, then it is diseased. Similarly, all living entities who are not giving . . . rendering any service
to the Lord, they are simply working for sense gratification, that is diseased condition. And in the
diseased condition, nobody can be happy. That is not possible. If you have got some disease, you
cannot be happy.
So that is the position. They cannot understand that by serving K■■■a, we become healthy, or in our
normal position. This is called ignorance. Somebody is trying to forget Him; somebody is trying to
become equal with Him. This business is going on. And nobody is submitting that, "My Lord, I forgot my
service. From this day, I become again Your servant. Please give me protection." Sarva-dharm■n
parityajya m■m . . . (BG 18.66). This is the teaching of all ■■stra, all Vedas.
But these people, the other party, they have become blind. They have become blind. Why?
Lobha-upahata-cetasa■. They have lost their sense. Kula-k■aya-k■ta■ do■am. There is a great fault
by destroying dynasty. Nowadays people are destroying from the womb, abortion, contraception,
destroying. They do not know. Kula-k■aya. Actually putra. Putra means . . . put means
pu■-n■ma-narakam. There is a hell which is called pu■-n■ma-naraka. And tra means tr■yate, deliver.
So putra means pu■-n■ma-narak■t tr■yate iti putra. The Sanskrit word for son, putra, means that the
son is expected to deliver the forefathers from the hellish condition of life. Sometimes due to our sinful
activities, we become ghost. That is very hellish condition. So when ■raddh■ is offered by the
putra—Who will offer? The putra will offer; that is the duty—then he gets again material body. These
are the subtle laws.
People do not know; neither they are eager to know. But these are the information we get from Vedic
literature. Putra has got a duty to save the forefathers. Therefore one has to . . . it is his duty to keep a
putra. At least one son he must leave. But people are not very much anxious to have putra. Rather to
kill putra. They are so sinful. K■ma-lobha-hata-cetasa■. Simply sense enjoyment. That's all. Why
bh■ry■? Why one should marry? Putr■rthe kriyate bh■ry■. Bh■ry■ means wife. One accepts a wife.
Why? For a putra. For a son. Why son is required? Putra■ pi■■a■ prayojanam: offering oblations by
the putra to deliver the forefathers. That is prayojanam. That is absolutely necessary. Each and every
one should leave a putra before his death. He has got so many duties. This is Vedic civilization. But
nobody now cares for that. Neither it is possible. Therefore the only remedy is to surrender. ■ara■yam.
The one excuse is that every one of us, we are indebted to devar■i, devat■, the demigods. The
demigods, just like Indra: he supplies us water. Just like we are obliged to pay tax to the water
department, to the fire department, to the education department, so many department government. Or
once we pay our income tax, that is distributed to so many department. So actually why we pay?
Because we are indebted. Now, the sunshine, we are getting advantage of sunshine, so we are
indebted to the sun-god. Similarly, we are indebted to the moon-god. We are receiving so much
advantages. Varu■a. Deva. So we are indebted to so many demigods. Similarly, we are indebted to the
■■is. Just like Vy■sadeva: he has given us this Vedic literature. We are taking advantage of it. So we
must feel indebted. Deva■■i, ■■i.
First of all we are indebted to the devat■s, and then to the ■■is, then the bh■ta, ordinary living entities.
Just like we are taking milk from the cows. We are indebted. Now we are killing them. They are
committing simply sinful life, and they want to be happy and peaceful. Just see. We are indebted. I am
obliged to you for your service. So instead of feeling obligation, if I cut your throat, how gentleman I am,
just see, imagine.
So we are indebted. Devar■i-bh■t■pta-n■■■■ pit■■■m (SB 11.5.41). And pit■■■m, these pit■,
kula-k■aya, forefathers, I have got this body . . . from my grandfather, my father has got this body; from
my father, I have got this body. I am also indebted. Because this body, human body, is a chance for
understanding, for my position. I can get out of the clutches of this m■y■ of transmigrating from one
body to another. So this opportunity I have got by the grace of my forefathers. These are feelings of
obligation. And there is duty. Therefore Arjuna is considering so many things, because he is devotee.
Kula-k■aya-k■ta■ do■a■ mitra-drohe ca p■takam (BG 1.37). "These rascals, they have become lost
of their intelligence on account of greediness for acquiring the empire. But so far I am concerned,"
Arjuna said, katha■ na jñeyam asm■bhi■ (BG 1.38). Plural number: "by us." "Us" means including
K■■■a. He is saying not "I" or "by me." He is including K■■■a: "You are in this side; so because You
are on my side, You are my charioteer, if I do not consider all these things, what people will say? That
'Arjuna is such a great devotee of K■■■a. And K■■■a is there. He is committing such sinful activities.'
" Therefore he says, katha■ na jñeyam asm■bhi■. He is dragging K■■■a also. That is right, yes. A
saintly person, a devotee, should consider all these things before acting, "Whether I am doing it
property or improperly?" This is Arjuna. The other party, lobha-upahata-cetasa■. Upahata-cetasa■:
they have lost their sense. But we cannot. A devotee must be very responsible. He must act in such a
way that nobody can blame him. Otherwise everyone say: "What kind of devotee he is?"
So this is the duty. They should be very cautious. A sanny■s■, they should be very cautious. Caitanya
Mah■prabhu said, sanny■s■ra alpa-chidre bahu kari' mane. A ordinary g■hastha, or . . . g■hastha
only. If he talks with woman, nobody will blame. He is g■hastha. But if a sanny■s■ talks with woman
very intimately, oh, immediately people will take note of it. Sanny■s■ra alpa-chidre bahu kari' mane.
That is the practice. He should be very cautious. So a devotee, a sanny■s■, they have got very, very
great responsibility. People will very easily criticize them. So Arjuna is considering all these point.
Katha■ na jñeyam asm■bhi■ p■p■d asm■n nivartitum (BG 1.38): "They may indulge in these sinful
activities. How we can indulge? What people will say?" Kula-k■aya-k■ta■ do■a■ prapa■yadbhir
jan■rdana: "He Jan■rdana, You are maintainer of the people. So if the people become sinful, so it is
very difficult to maintain them." These things are being considered. Kula-k■aya. So we cannot destroy
family. But on one condition we can become free from all this obligation. What is that? Gata■
■arabya■ parih■tya kartum (SB 11.5.41). ■ara■yam. Mukunda-cara■am: one who has dedicated his
life simply to serve Mukunda, K■■■a, Mukunda. Muk means mukti, liberation. And ■nanda. K■■■a
gives liberation. His name is Govinda, Mukunda. Hundreds and thousands of names K■■■a has got.
So if one has taken . . . fully surrendering unto the lotus feet of Mukunda, he has no more any
obligation, either these pit■, devar■i, deva, devat■, demigod, ■■i, bh■ta. He is immune, because he
is transcendental.
But so long one is not a devotee, one who is not fully surrendered to the lotus feet of Mukunda, he must
have to follow all these regulative principles and duties. He cannot be released. Everything, account is
kept. Prak■te■ kriyam■■■ni gu■ai■ karm■■i sarva■a■ (BG 3.27). Everything is noted down.
karma■■ daiva-netre■a (SB 3.31.1). According to his karma, he is going to get another body. These
are the subtle laws. Therefore kula-k■aya-do■am. You cannot destroy your family. Materially, you
cannot destroy your family. So Arjuna is speaking, kula-k■aya■ k■ta■ do■a■ prapa■yadbhir
jan■rdana (BG 1.38). "We can see. These rascals, they have lost their intelligence, but when we see,
how we can destroy the family?"
So further explanation will be given next. (break)
Pradyumna: Translation: "With the destruction of dynasty, the eternal family tradition is vanquished,
and thus the rest of the family becomes involved in irreligious practice." (BG 1.39)
Prabhup■da: So, so much responsibility is there, killing the family. Because they have no responsibility
at the present moment, everyone irreligious. Two things are there: religion and irreligion. K■■■a also
says, yad■ yad■ hi dharmasya gl■nir bhavati abhyutth■nam adharmasya (BG 4.7). If we cannot keep
on religious principles, then—we have to do something—then we have to enhance our irreligious
principle. So this family tradition, according to Vedic civilization, was very strictly observed so that the
family may be kept in order in religious principle. Why? Now, because the human life is meant for
reviving his eternal position, san■tana. This word is used here, kula-dharm■■ san■tan■■.
The real purpose of life, especially human life, is meant for reviving our san■tana-dharma, san■tana
occupation, eternal occupation. By observing the rules and regulation of var■■■rama-dharma, four
var■as and four ■■ramas . . . that is called kula-dharma. Br■hma■a, k■atriya, vai■ya, ■■dra,
brahmac■r■, g■hastha, v■naprastha and sanny■sa. Each one of them must strictly observe the rules
and regulation of that particular ■■rama. Why it should be observed so strictly? Because by observing
the regulative principle of each stages of life, one will be able to please the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
If we observe strictly the rules and regulation of kula-dharma . . . kula-dharma means if you are a
br■hma■a, you must observe the regulative principles, the qualitative principles of a br■hma■a. If you
are in . . . a k■atriya, then you must also observe the k■atriya principles. All these are described in the
Bhagavad-g■t■, who is br■hma■a, who is k■atriya, by symptoms. By symptoms we have to accept
whether one is br■hma■a or k■atriya or vai■ya, not by birth. That is the injunction of the ■■stra.
So this has to be observed. If we want actually deliverance from this material entanglement, so these
rules and regulations of kula-dharma we must observe. If we do not observe, then immediately we
become irreligious. Dharme na■■e k■ta■ k■tsnam adharmam abhibhavati iti uta. Uta, Arjuna said: "It
is said." He has learned from higher authorities. Uta. "It is said" means "Said by authorities." So "If
adharma, irreligious life, is propagated on account of loss of kula-dharma, then everything is lost, my
dear K■■■a. So why shall I kill?" Other things also will be described later on, that the . . . when the
male members are killed, the female members become widow, and they, their character becomes
polluted. So many things K■■■a will speak about this family life.
So at the present moment, there is no such family life, no consideration of religion, no consideration of
irreligious life. Everything just like animals. Kalau ■■dra-sambhava■. If not animals, they are all
■■dras; nobody br■hma■a, nobody k■atriya, nobody vai■ya. So it is a chaotic condition of the human
society. Therefore it cannot be revived to the original position of systematic institutional position. It is
not possible. Everything is lost. Therefore by the Caitanya Mah■prabhu's grace, one thing:
Everything is lost. Now, simply by chanting harer n■ma, the holy name of Lord K■■■a, you become
again situated in the original position. Everything is adjusted, because it is transcendental. So there is
no other way.
Caitanya Mah■prabhu is so merciful that from the ■■stras he has selected this process of sa■k■rtana
movement: ceto-darpa■a-m■rjanam bhava-mah■-d■v■gni-nirv■panam (CC Antya 20.12). The
human life is meant for extinguishing the blazing fire of material existence. But we are not in regulative
principles. We have lost everything—our san■tana-kula-dharma, everything. Under the circumstances,
Caitanya Mah■prabhu gives us the greatest facility according to ■■stra. That is the boon of this age:
k■rtan■d eva k■■■asya mukta-sa■ga■ para■ vrajet (SB 12.3.51). Simply by chanting the holy name
of K■■■a, everyone becomes free from all contamination of this age, mukta-sa■ga■ para■ vrajet.
And he becomes so purified that he becomes fit to go back to home, back to Godhead.
So this opportunity, chanting of Hare K■■■a mantra, we should not miss. We should . . . we must.
Where is the difficulty, Hare K■■■a chanting? K■rtan■ya■ sad■ hari■. T■■■d api sun■cena taror
api sahi■■un■ (CC Adi 17.31). This is the only savior for the human society of this age.
Thank you very much. Hare K■■■a.
Devotees: All glories to ■r■la Prabhup■da. (end)
