Pradyumna: O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo
bhagavate v■sudev■ya. (Prabhup■da and devotees repeat) (leads chanting of verse)
(break)
kim—what use; na■—to us; r■jyena—is the kingdom; govinda—O K■■■a; kim—what;
bhogai■—enjoyment; j■vitena—by living; v■—either; ye■■m—for whom; arthe—for the matter of;
k■■k■itam—desired; na■—our; r■jyam—kingdom; bhog■■—material enjoyment; sukh■ni—all
happiness; ca—also; te—all of them; ime—these; avasthit■■—situated; yuddhe—in this battlefield;
pr■■■n—lives; tyaktv■—giving up; dhan■ni—riches; ca—also; ■c■ry■■—teachers;
pitara■—fathers; putr■■—sons; tath■—as well as; eva—certainly; ca—also;
pit■mah■■—grandfathers; m■tul■■—maternal uncles; ■va■ur■■—fathers-in-law;
pautr■■—grandsons; ■y■l■■—brothers-in-law; sambandhina■—relatives; tath■—as well as;
et■n—all these; na—never; hantum—for killing; icch■mi—do I wish; ghnata■—being killed; api—even;
madhus■dana—O killer of the demon Madhu (K■■■a); api—even if; trailokya—of the three worlds;
r■jyasya—of the kingdoms; heto■—in exchange; kim—what to speak of; nu—only; mah■-k■te—for
the sake of earth; nihatya—by killing; dh■rtar■■■r■n—the sons of Dh■tar■■■ra; na■—our;
k■—what; pr■ti■—pleasure; sy■t—will there be; jan■rdana—O maintainer of all living entities.
Translation: "O Govinda, of what avail to us are kingdoms, happiness or even life itself when all those
for whom we may desire them are now arrayed in this battlefield? O Madhus■dana, when teachers,
fathers, sons, grandfathers, maternal uncles, fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law and all relatives
are ready to give up their lives and properties and are standing before me, then why should I wish to kill
them, though I may survive? O maintainer of all creatures, I am not prepared to fight with them even in
exchange for the three worlds, let alone this earth."
Prabhup■da: So Arjuna is thinking in terms of his own sense gratification. He is posing himself as if he
does not know what is the plan of K■■■a. Yes. The plan of K■■■a is explained by K■■■a in the
Bhagavad-g■t■:
The plan is already known to everyone how the management of the cosmic manifestation is going on.
The cosmic manifestation is there, this material world. It is, although temporary, it has got a purpose.
The purpose is to give chance to the living entities who are rotting in this material world to revive his
K■■■a consciousness, or original consciousness, and go back to home, back to Godhead. This is the
plan.
This material cosmic manifestation is there, bh■tv■ bh■tv■ pral■yate (BG 8.19). The nature is, it is
sometimes manifested and sometimes it is dissolved, annihilated. Everything material, that is the way.
Just like our body: it is created at a certain date, and it will be annihilated at a certain date. Similarly,
this gigantic body . . . that is also body of the Supreme Lord, vir■t body. Vir■t means gigantic. K■■■a
will show His vir■t-r■pa to Arjuna.
So this external body, exactly just like we have got our this external body, internal body. The soul is
covered by two bodies: the external and internal. External means these gross elements—earth, water,
air, fire, sky. And internal means the mind, intelligence and ego. They are also material. Within that two
covering . . . just like our body is covered by shirt and coat, similarly, the soul is encaged in two kinds of
bodies. When this gross body is finished, the subtle body, mind, intelligence and ego, they are there.
The soul is covered. The gross body is finished. That is called death. But people do not know that there
is no death for the soul. The outward cover is finished, the inward cover is there, and the inward cover
will carry the soul to another gross body. That is called transmigration. The mind is creating. As we are
making our consciousness in this life, so we are making our next life also. Y■nti deva-vrat■ dev■n
pit■n y■nti pit■-vrat■■ (BG 9.25).
So we have got two kinds of bodies, gross and subtle, and within that, I am living, you are living, soul.
Dehino 'smin yath■ dehe kaum■ra■ yauvana■ jar■ (BG 2.13). Asmin dehe, within this body, there is
the deh■, the proprietor of the body. So people do not understand that this finishing of this gross body
is not actually death or annihilation of the soul. Na hanyate hanyam■ne ■ar■re (BG 2.20). Even
annihilation of the subtle body does not mean death of the soul. Na hanyate hanyam■ne ■ar■re.
There are two kinds of bodies. So when the gross body is annihilated, the subtle body carries me to
another gross body, just like the air carries the flavor of a certain place. If the air is passing over rose
garden, it carries the flavor. Although we cannot see, but we can smell. We can understand the breeze
is so fragrant, means it is coming over a rose garden. Similarly, filthy place, a bad smell, the air carries.
So the subtle body carries the mental situation of the soul and puts him into a particular body according
to that mental situation. Ya■ ya■ v■pi smaran loke tyajaty ante kalevaram (BG 8.6). At the time of
death, the mental situation will give me chance for another gross body. If we have created my mind
K■■■a conscious, then he will give me . . . the mental situation will give me a body by which I can
make further progress. That is also stated in the Bhagavad-g■t■: ■uc■n■■ ■r■mat■■ gehe
yoga-bhra■■o sanj■yate (BG 6.41). yoga-bhra■■a■. Suppose one has begun yoga. yoga means
attempt to link with the Supreme. That is called yoga. And viyoga means without any relationship, or
without any attachment for the Supreme. yoga means plus, and viyoga means minus. So plus. Plus
means one plus one equal to two.
So when we try to connect with the Supreme, then we can understand there is God and I am also there;
we have got intimate relationship. That is explained in the Vedas. Two birds are sitting on the same
tree. One bird is eating the fruit and the other bird is simply witnessing. The witnessing bird is God,
K■■■a, and the eating bird is the living entity. So God is witnessing all our activities and our mental
situation. So He orders m■y■, the external energy, prak■ti that, "He requires to be given a body like
this," and the material nature gives the living entity a particular type of body, and they are numbering
8,400,000s.
So there is no certainty what kind of body I am going to get next life. But in the Bhagavad-g■t■ it is
explained that if you are situated on the mode of goodness, then you will get your place in the higher
planetary system.
There are three qualities, material nature. They are working. And we are under the influence of either of
them—either in the influence of goodness, or in the influence of passion or in the influence of
ignorance. So when we are under the influence of ignorance, jaghanya-gu■a-v■tti, then our behavior
and activities becomes very abominable, very, very much abominable. And especially in this Kali-yuga,
it is stated that people will have no fixed time for eating or sleeping or taking bath. In this way, their
bodily features will be like ghost. That we are seeing actually. The hippies, they are becoming.
Practically in this age there will be no place even for taking daily bath. That we see especially in this
country. The apartment, there is no bathing place. They have to go outside.
So things are deteriorating very, very much. Adho gacchanti t■mas■■. Therefore the human
civilization means to make progress towards the quality of goodness. That will help him for making
further progress. ■rdhva■ gacchanti sattva-sth■■ (BG 14.18). ■rdhvam means higher planetary
system. Here it is said that api trailokya-r■jyasya heto■. Trailokya. O■ bh■r bhuva■ sva■. This is
bh■r-loka. Above this, bhuvar-loka, and above that, svar-loka, heavenly planets. O■ bh■r bhuva■
sva■ tat savitur vare■yam. This is G■yatr■-mantra.
So Arjuna is speaking of trailokya-r■jyasya. He is ascertaining that, "Even if I get the kingdom of the
three worlds, what to speak of only this earthly planet, what is the insignificant, even if I get the kingdom
of trailokya—svarga, martya, p■t■la, like that—still, I am not prepared to fight with my kinsmen, what to
speak of this earthly planet." He decided like that. This is called family attachment. He is speaking,
"Even in exchange of kingdom of the three worlds, I am not prepared to fight."
"What I shall get by killing my cousin-brothers? And along with them, there are so many relatives."
"My dear K■■■a, Madhus■dana." He is not addressing K■■■a as "K■■■a." He is addressing Him,
"Madhus■dana." He is reminding Him that "You also kill, but You kill Your enemies, Madhu." Madhu
was a demon. Madhu-kai■abha-bhare hari-mur■re. Madhu-kai■abha-bhare. So, "You are
Madhus■dana. You are the killer of Madhu demon, who was Your enemy. You are not Nanda-s■dana
or Ya■od■-s■dana." That is reminding Him, little critically that, "You are Yourself Madhus■dana. You
kill only Your enemies. Why You are inducing me to kill my kinsmen?" This is the criticism.
So et■n na hantum icch■mi. So "You may induce me, but I am not going to kill them." Et■n na hantum.
Hantum, "To kill, I am not willing." Then the question may be that, "It is fight. If you do not kill, if you
stand still, then they will kill you. Because it is fight. Then what you will do?" "Yes, I agree." Ghnato 'pi.
"If they kill me, I agree. Still, I will not kill them." Ghnato 'pi. "Even they kill me, I will not fight, I will not
kill them. But if they kill me, that is also agreed; still, I will not kill." Just see how much determination.
This is called family attraction.
So he is preparing the ground for teaching Bhagavad-g■t■. We are so much attached to our bodily
conception of life, and expansion of bodily conception of life. He is thinking in terms of bodily
conception of life. ■y■l■■ bandhu■ pitara■ pit■mah■■. Because somebody happens to be . . . just
like there are many thousands of women. One woman with whom I have got my bodily connection, I
take, "She is my wife. I have to give protection." This is all based on bodily connection. So long there
was no bodily connection with that woman, you didn't care for her. But as soon as there is bodily
connection, immediately the attachment is there. Tayor . . . tayor mitho h■daya-granthim ■hu■ (SB
5.5.8). Generally, everyone has got attraction for woman. Woman has got attraction for man. That is
general. But when they are united by marriage, the attraction becomes very acute, h■daya-granthim
■hu■. H■daya-granthi means very hard knot. H■daya-granthim ■hu■. So this is called family
attraction. Then I get my attraction for my children, for my society, for my home.
So the Arjuna's description of this means bodily concept of life. The sum and substance of this whole
passage described by Arjuna, ki■ no r■jyena govinda ki■ bhogair j■vitena v■ (BG 1.32). Everyone
works so hard to acquire money. Why? The family attraction. We were student of economics, and there
was a book, Marshall's Economics. That Mr. Marshall is explaining that economic impetus begins from
family affection. Family affection. Unless one has got family, he will not try to earn. He will not try to
earn money. He will be irresponsible. Therefore it is essential. When one is given some responsible
post . . . some . . . I know some English firm in India; I had some connection with him.
So he was simply trying to know, "The man who is going to work for us, whether he is family man?"
Because unless he is a family man, he has no attraction. He can give up the job at any moment,
because there is no family attraction. This is the psychology. Therefore according to Vedic civilization, it
is the duty of the parents to get the sons and daughters married so that they will have family attraction,
they will be established, they will be organized, things will go nicely. If there is no family attraction, no
responsibility, then the things will not go nicely. This is the basic principle.
So anyway, the family attraction is required for regulated life. If there is no family attraction, there is no
regulated life. We have got very good experience of these things. So family attraction required. It is not
that it is rejected. It is required for regulated life. Unregulated life cannot make any progress. Therefore,
in the Vedic civilization, the g■hastha-■■rama is recommended. Everyone should be married and
everyone should live. If possible, let him live a brahmac■r■. First of all the brahmac■r■-■■rama is
given there, austerity, under the guidance of the spiritual master. So the idea is not to be entangled.
Brahmac■r■ has no connection with worldly affairs. He's simply interested with the order of the
spiritual master. That is called brahmac■r■. So one is trained up as a brahmac■r■, and he is
sufficiently given knowledge that, "Don't be entangled with these material affairs. Don't be entangled.
Try to avoid. But if you are still unable, your sex impulse is very strong, all right, then you go and
marry." This is the process.
First of all he is taught to be vair■g■. Vair■gya. This whole K■■■a consciousness movement may be
called vair■gya-vidy■. Sarvabhauma Bha■■■c■rya, he wrote one verse on Caitanya Mah■prabhu.
He wrote one hundred verses. Out of that, two verses or four verses are available. When he composed
the verses eulogizing Caitanya Mah■prabhu, and it was shown to Him, because it was
self-eulogization, He immediately torn up the paper. So still, the devotees collected and got two or four
verses. So one of the verses written by Sarvabhauma Bha■■■c■rya is,
vair■gya-vidy■-nija-bhakti-yogam (CC Madhya 6.254). This bhakti-yoga is vair■gya-vidy■, how to
teach people to be detached from this material attraction. This is vair■gya-vidy■. In another place, in
■r■mad-Bh■gavatam, it is said:
In the human life, two things required: jñ■na and vair■gya. Jñ■na means that, "I am not this body."
This is jñ■na. Not that so-called scientific knowledge, more attachment for this body. That is not . . .
that is ajñ■na. That is not jñ■na. Jñ■na means how to achieve the status of vair■gya. That is jñ■na.
Jñ■na-vair■gya-yuktay■ (SB 1.2.12). So the brahmac■r■ is taught vair■gya-vidy■.
Vair■gya-vidy■-nija-bhakti-yoga-■ik■■rtham eka■ puru■a■ pur■■a■ (CC Madhya 6.254).
Sarvabhauma Bha■■■c■rya says that, "This Caitanya Mah■prabhu, who has taken sanny■sa, very
early age, only at the age of twenty-four years, very young man, He has got His young wife at home,
sixteen years old, and He has got His mother, old, seventy years old. So He has given up all
responsibility, and there is no other male member in the family to look after them, the mother and the
young wife. Still, He has taken sanny■sa. So therefore He is the pur■■a-puru■a, the Supreme
Person, but He has come to teach us this vair■gya-vidy■."
Vair■gya-vidy■-nija-bhakti-yoga-■ik■■rtham eka■ puru■a■ pur■■a■ (CC Madhya 6.254). Puru■a■
pur■■a■, K■■■a. K■■■a is described: puru■a■ pur■■a■. ■■■vata■ pur■■a■. Divyam,
■di-puru■am. So puru■a■ pur■■a■. Vair■gya-vidy■-nija-bhakti-yogam: "He has come to teach the
bhakti-yoga, which is vair■gya-vidy■." Vair■gya-vidy■-nija-bhakti-yoga-■ik■■rtham eka■ puru■a■
pur■■a■ ■r■-k■■■a-caitanya-■ar■ra-dh■r■ (CC Madhya 6.254). "Now He has assumed the body
of ■r■ K■■■a Caitanya Mah■prabhu." Tam aha■ prapadye: "I offer my respectful obeisances to this
person. He has come to teach us vair■gya-vidy■."
So vair■gya-vidy■. This family attachment, and just the opposite thing is vair■gya-vidy■, how to
become detached. This is the whole process of Vedic civilization. Everyone has got this attachment for
the body and expansion of the body. So vair■gya-vidy■ means to be detached. That is called
brahma-jñ■na. Brahma-bh■ta■ prasann■tm■ na ■ocati na k■■k■ati (BG 18.54). That is
brahma-jñ■na. As soon as you understand aha■ brahm■smi, "I am not this body; I am spirit soul," this
is called brahma-jñ■na. So long you do not get this knowledge, you are in ignorance. That ignorance,
there are degrees. In the sattva-gu■a, or in the modes of goodness, you can simply theoretically
understand that, "I am not this body." That is sattva-gu■a. Brahminical qualities. ■amo damas titik■■
■rjava■ jñ■na, jñ■na■ vijñ■nam ■stikya■ brahma-karma svabh■va-jam (BG 18.42). When you . . .
brahma-j■n■t■ti br■hma■a■. Br■hma■a means who has got the knowledge of brahma.
Veda-pa■h■d bhaved vipro brahma-j■n■t■ti br■hma■a■, janman■ j■yate ■■dra■ sa■sk■r■d
bhaved dvija■.
So everyone is born ■■dra, but by cultivation of knowledge and culture, one can become . . .
sa■sk■r■t. Therefore, according to Vedic system, there are ten kinds of sa■sk■ra, reformatory
method. This upanayana-sa■sk■ra, this is also one of the sa■sk■ra, sacred thread. Upanayana. Upa
means near, and nayana means bringing. When the spiritual master brings nearer to spiritual
consciousness, a person is given the upanayana, or the sacred thread. The sacred thread is the
indication that, "This man is now under the control of the spiritual master for advancing in K■■■a
consciousness." This thread ceremony. This is called upanayana. Similarly, there is reformatory
method, marriage . . . there are ten kinds of reformatory . . . the first beginning is garbh■dh■na. So
these things are impossible to introduce now in this Kali-yuga. Therefore the only reformatory method
is:
In this age of Kali, people are so fallen, so degraded, that it is not possible to introduce systematically
the whole Vedic principle. It is not possible. That is not possible. It is Caitanya Mah■prabhu's grace,
mercy, that He has given us mercifully, vair■gya-vidy■-nija-bhakti (CC Madhya 6.254), just to teach
very short-cut method. What is that? Chant Hare K■■■a. Simple. Simple.
Ceto-darpa■a-m■rjana■ bhava-mah■-d■v■gni (CC Antya 20.12). You are suffering in this material
world, d■v■gni, now, forest fire. This material world is forest fire. But they are so ignorant, they cannot
understand that, "We are burning in the blazing fire of this material existence. Our attempt should be
how to get out of it." But there is no such knowledge. Just like animal. The animal are suffering. They
are being taken to the slaughterhouse. There is no, I mean, strength of protesting. They are being
slaughtered. So we are being also being slaughtered by the laws of nature. We are also being
slaughtered. So we do not know how to make progress. That is slaughtering.
So this is going on, very abominable condition of this age, mand■■ sumanda-matayo manda-bh■gy■
hy upadrut■■ (SB 1.1.10). First of all, they are very much slow, or bad. Manda means bad or slow.
Slow means the human form of life is meant for making progress in spiritual understanding. So in this
age every man is very slow. They do not know that there is need of spiritual understanding, there is
need of making progress in spiritual life. They have forgotten. They have become just like animals.
Therefore they are called mand■■. Sumanda-mataya■. And if one is little interested, he accepts
something bogus which has no meaning. "I belong to this 'ism'; I belong to that 'ism,' that 'ism,' that . . ."
"Ism," what is that "ism"? dharma, or "ism," what is that required? dharma■ tu s■k■■d
bhagavat-pra■■tam . . . (SB 6.3.19). It is simple thing that the dharma means, religious code means,
the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. We have to obey. That is called dharma.
But they have no knowledge what is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, what is His order. They are
here in the Bhagavad-g■t■. The Supreme Personality of Godhead comes down to teach us, yad■
yad■ hi dharmasya gl■nir bhavati (BG 4.7): "When people forget their regulative life, I come down." So
He has come down. He has come down. He will teach Arjuna that, "You are so much family-wise
attached." Then He will teach. From the Second Chapter He will begin the teaching. Prajñ■-v■d■■■
ca bh■■ase. A■ocy■n anva■ocas tva■ prajñ■-v■d■■■ ca bh■■ase (BG 2.11). When K■■■a . . .
Arjuna accepted K■■■a, that "I am now puzzled what to do. So I know I am puzzled. I am k■atriya. It
is my duty to fight, but I am hesitating. So it is very embarrassing puzzle. Therefore I am surrendering
unto You." ■i■yas te 'ha■ ■■dhi m■■ prapannam (BG 2.7): "I am becoming Your disciple, not friend.
Now let us talk as master and disciple, not as friend and friend."
So when he accepted K■■■a as the ma . . . K■■■a is always master, but it is simply acceptance. So
at that time K■■■a will speak, a■ocy■n anva■ocas tva■ prajñ■-v■d■■■ ca bh■■ase (BG 2.11)
that, "You are . . ." Gat■s■n agat■s■■■ ca n■nu pa■■it■■ ■ocanti. Pa■■ita. "You are posing
yourself . . ." He will speak so many things. That is like pa■■ita, learned. It is very nice thing. "K■■■a .
. ." Arjuna is saying that "How can I kill my kinsmen? There is my grandfather, there is my teacher,
there are my kinsmen." It is not bad. For worldly men this is very nice consideration, that "I am not
going to kill my kinsmen."
That is a very good consideration. Prajñ■-v■d■■■ ca bh■■ase. But spiritually, it is ignorance, it is
foolishness. Materially, it may be very nice thing, he's talking very nice. Therefore the first chastisement
was . . . K■■■a took the position of spiritual master. So spiritual master has the right to chastise the
disciple. So immediately He chastised. A■ocy■n anva■ocas tva■ prajñ■-v■d■■■ ca bh■■ase (BG
2.11): "My dear Arjuna, you are talking, you are lamenting so badly, and at the same time you are
talking just like a very learned man." So this is the position of the world. One talks very high words, but
his behavior is very abominable.
So gradually we shall come to that point. So let us finish. K■■■a . . . now Arjuna is promising . . .
K■■■a arranged this fight to execute His purpose. Paritr■■■ya s■dh■n■■ vin■■■ya ca du■k■t■m
(BG 4.8). That was His purpose. "Du■k■t■m, all these sinful rascals, they are ruling over the world. I
want to kill them."
Therefore this battle was arranged so that all the rascals and demons will come there and it will be
killed, in one place. And the right person, Mah■r■ja Yudhi■■hira, will be installed on the throne. That
was his plan. The right person. K■■■a wants His representative to rule over the . . . king means
representative of God. (break) (end)
