Pradyumna: Translation: "Alas, how strange it is that we are preparing to commit greatly sinful acts,
driven by the desire to enjoy royal happiness."
Prabhup■da:
So, sometimes Arjuna is accused, Bhagavad-g■t■ is also accused, that "There is violence. There is
violence. Bhagavad-g■t■ is full of violence." Yes, it is full of violence, the warfield. But here the
Vai■■ava thinking . . . Arjuna is thinking that it was arranged for his r■jya-sukha. Yad
r■jya-sukha-lobhena. Labhena. It was arranged for the satisfaction of Arjuna so that he could enjoy the
kingdom and the happiness thereof. Actually, it was not so. It was arranged by K■■■a for His
satisfaction, not for Arjuna's satisfaction.
So that is the difference between ordinary work and devotional service. Devotional service and ordinary
work, they look almost equal. Just like we are living in this house. The neighbors, they may think that
"Some people are living here, chanting, dancing. We also dance. We also sometimes sing. And eating,
they are also eating. Then where is the difference?" They may think that "Where is the difference
between devotional service and ordinary work?" It looks almost equal.
Therefore people misunderstand that Bhagavad-g■t■ is ordinary warfare, violence. But it is not that. It
is arranged by K■■■a because, to fulfill His mission. His mission is paritr■■■ya s■dh■n■■
vin■■■ya ca du■k■tam (BG 4.8). That is His satisfaction, not Arjuna's satisfaction, not anyone's
satisfaction. It is His plan. He comes, He descends on this planet, in this universe, just to establish the
real purpose of religious life and to kill, to vanquish those who are opposing the real purpose of life,
human life. That is His mission, simultaneously two things. Paritr■■■ya s■dh■n■■ vin■■■ya ca
du■k■tam. So svajanam . . .
Svajanam means kinsmen. So kinsmen does not mean, in higher sense, only my brother or my sister or
my father or my uncle. No. Svajanam means all living entities. Because one who hasn't got K■■■a
consciousness, with ordinary consciousness, material consciousness, he cannot think in terms of
svajanam. "My kinsmen, all living entities," he cannot think. Actually, everyone is our svajana, because
if God is father, as K■■■a claims, aha■ b■ja-prada■ pit■ (BG 14.4), if He is the supreme father . . .
Not only He claims; at least, any fine religious system claims, "God is the original father." That's a fact.
Aha■ sarvasya prabhavo matta■ sarvam pravartate (BG 10.8). Everything has come from Him. He is
the supreme father. So if K■■■a is the supreme father, He is father of everyone. Sarva-yoni■u
kaunteya (BG 14.4). In all species of life, in all forms of life, they are all our svajana, kinsmen. How it
cannot be? Because K■■■a is the original father. This is K■■■a consciousness. Therefore a devotee
of K■■■a does not want to commit a little harm to any living entity. That is K■■■a consciousness.
Pa■■it■, one who is learned, he is sama-dar■ina■, equal vision. Not that . . . just K■■■a has equal
vision. That picture, K■■■a, He's embracing the calf. He is not only embracing the gop■s, but He is
embracing the calf also, cows also. Sama-dar■ina■. For K■■■a the gop■s, the calf and the cows, or
anyone in V■nd■vana who has come to serve Him, they are all equal to Him. Somebody wants to
serve K■■■a as calf, somebody wants to serve K■■■a as cow, somebody wants to serve K■■■a as
gop■, somebody wants to serve K■■■a as cowherd boy, somebody wants to serve K■■■a as His
father, somebody wants to serve K■■■a as His mother. These are the different mellows, different
taste. Every living entity has got his own taste, how to love K■■■a. But the central point is to love
K■■■a.
K■■■a also reciprocates. He has no discrimination that "Here is gop■s, beautiful girl. Therefore I shall
love her more than the calf." No. K■■■a is not so partial. Similarly, K■■■a's devotees also, because
he has . . . K■■■a consciousness means he has got now in minute quantity K■■■a's quality.
Therefore he is also equal to everyone. He thinks everyone svajana, the same . . . member of the same
family. It does not matter if one has become ant or one has become elephant. The living spark, the
soul, is the same dimension, either within the ant or in the elephant. This dimension of the soul we have
several times discussed, one ten-thousandth part of the top of the hair.
That is the dimension. In ■■stra we get the dimension of the soul—very, very minute: one
ten-thousandth part of the top of the hair. Just imagine. So that portion is within the ant and within
Brahma and within elephant. Therefore, one who is pa■■ita, one who knows what are these souls,
spiritual sparks, part and parcel of K■■■a, if he has got full knowledge, then his vision is:
Sama-dar■ina■ means equal vision. A learned br■hma■a, he is most intelligent man in the human
society, so, and a dog . . . superficially, externally, there is much difference. Here is a dog, a street dog,
and here is a learned br■hma■a. But one who is pa■■ita, one who is K■■■a conscious, he sees that
the pa■■ita and the dog, they are the same, because they are also the same spiritual spark. By his
karma, he has become a learned pa■■ita, and by his karma, he has become a dog. But within the
different body, dehino 'smin yath■ dehe kaum■ra■ (BG 2.13), asmin dehe, in this body there is the
soul.
That is his vision. Of course, externally, it is not that I shall behave equally with the br■hma■a and the
dog. That is external behavior. But internally, we should know that both the br■hma■a and the dog,
they're a spiritual spark. This is called brahma-jñ■na. Brahma-jñ■na means the knowledge of spiritual
self. That is called brahma-jñ■na. So when one attains this brahma-jñ■na, then brahma-bh■ta■
prasann■tm■ na ■ocati na k■■k■ati, sama■ sarve■u bh■te■u (BG 18.54). Samat■, equal. That is
brahma-jñ■na.
So in this verse K■■■a says, er, Arjuna says that yad r■jya-sukha-lobhena hantu■ svajanam
udyat■■ (BG 1.44). So when we are killing animals for the satisfaction of our tongue, this is mahat
p■pam. K■■■a, Arjuna says, aho bata mahat p■pam. Mahat p■pam, great sinful act. Great sinful act.
If we want to kill anyone, any living entity, for my satisfaction, either my tongue satisfaction or any
sense satisfaction, it is mah■-p■pam, great sinful act. Because they are all svajana. You cannot kill,
either you take this sense or that sense. But Arjuna is speaking in a limited sense; he is thinking of his
own family members. But if one is actually in knowledge, brahma-jñ■na, he thinks in the same way
that, "The lower animals, they are also our family members. And if I kill him for my satisfaction, my
sense satisfaction, it is great sinful act."
Unfortunately, everyone is killing for his sense gratification in the name of religion. In the name of
religion, although it is prohibited, still they are killing. Just imagine how much sinful activities they are
doing. And how they can be happy? Happiness, of course, a hog also thinks that he is very happy that
he is eating stool, living in filthy place, and because he has got the facility of sex life without any
discrimination, he may think happy life. But that is not happiness. Happiness is different thing. Sukham
■tyantika■ yat tad at■ndriya-gr■hyam (BG 6.21). If you want to feel happiness by your these blunt
material senses, that is not happiness. Happiness is beyond your material senses. ■tyantikam. That is
real happiness. Real happiness means it will never end, and you will never feel satiation that, "I no
more want." That is real happiness. Material happiness, there is no such thing that you will feel
immediately satiation. After enjoying any material happiness a few minutes, you will feel, "Again
another, again another, again another."
So therefore in the Bhagavad-g■t■ it is said, sukham ■tyantika■ yat tat (BG 6.21). So real, what is real
happiness, that is not felt by these blunt material senses. So what is that sense? That is purified
senses. Sarvop■dhi-vinirmuktam tat-paratvena nirmalam (CC Madhya 19.170). When our senses are
purified, tat-paratvena, for the sake of K■■■a, when our senses are employed for the sake of K■■■a,
that is purified senses. H■■■ke■a h■■■ke■a-sevana■ bhaktir ucyate. That is wanted.
So here, in the beginning, Arjuna, he's thinking in terms of his blunt senses. But the same thing he will
do. ■tyantikam, at■ndriya, purified senses. Just try to understand. This is K■■■a consciousness.
Arjuna is now thinking, yad r■jya-sukha-lobhena (BG 1.44): "For the matter of getting kingdom and
sense gratification, I am going to kill my kinsmen. So it is great sin." That's a fact. If the warfare in the
Kuruk■etra battlefield was for Arjuna's sense satisfaction, then it was a great sin. But actually, it is not
being done for Arjuna's satisfaction. It is to be done for K■■■a's satisfaction. So therefore the
conclusion should be that whatever we do, if we do it for our own sense satisfaction, that is
mah■-p■pam, sinful activities. But if we do the same thing for K■■■a's satisfaction, that is spiritual
advancement. This is the difference.
So outsider, they think that . . . a karm■ is working for his own satisfaction, and a devotee is working for
K■■■a's satisfaction. Although two things are similarly, externally it appears the same thing, but there
is great difference. Whatever you do for your own satisfaction, for the satisfaction of your whims, that is
mah■-p■pa, great sin. The same thing, when you do for K■■■a, that is opening your path to
liberation, back to home, back to Godhead. This is difference. You have to change the consciousness.
What you are doing? For whom you are doing? For yourself or for K■■■a? This is K■■■a
consciousness. And that is the perfection of life. In whatever position you are, whatever you are doing,
it doesn't matter. That is confirmed in the ■r■mad-Bh■gavatam:
Hari-to■a■am means to satisfy the Supreme Lord, Hari. That is perfection. It doesn't matter what you
are doing. Var■■■rama-vibh■ga■a■. First of all, "Whatever doing," it does not mean whatever
nonsense you are doing, that will be accepted. No. Var■■■rama-vibh■ga■a■. According to Vedic
civilization, there is division of var■a: br■hma■a, k■atriya, vai■ya, ■■dra. So activities must be done
according to the var■■■rama prescription. A br■hma■a is ordered to do like this: satya■ ■amo
damas titik■a ■rjavam. You should practice this. A k■atriya should practice this. And a vai■ya should
practice this. So therefore it is called var■■■rama—the prescribed duties are already there.
Therefore perfect human society means . . . first of all there must be this division, br■hma■a, k■atriya,
vai■ya. And when they act the duties of that particular position, br■hma■a, k■atriya, for the
satisfaction of K■■■a, that is perfection of life. It doesn't matter whether you are ■■dra or you are
br■hma■a, but if you act for the satisfaction of K■■■a according to the prescription of your position,
then your life is perfect. That is wanted. The whole human civilization should be based on this principle.
There must be division.
The division is already there. They should be coordinated, systematized. Not that everyone is
br■hma■a. Br■hma■a means the intelligent man. So we should pick up the intelligent men. They
should be trained as br■hma■a. Those who are martial, having fighting spirit, they should be selected
as k■atriya. Those who are for increasing money, mercantile mentality, they should be also collected.
Similarly, ■■dras. And they should be trained, everyone, to satisfy K■■■a.
Var■■■rama-vibh■ga■a■. Svanu■■hitasya dharmasya sa■siddhi■ hari-to■a■am (SB 1.2.13).
So here Arjuna is a fighter, he is engaged in fighting. Now he is thinking. That is proper. He is
Vai■■ava. He is devotee. He is properly thinking that, "For my sense gratification I am going to kill my
kinsmen? Oh, what a great sinful activity I am going to do." But actually, K■■■a is not engaging His
devotee to act sinfully. No. That is not K■■■a's business. Although superficially it appears that K■■■a
is engaging Arjuna to fight in the sinful activities, no, that is not sinful. Whatever K■■■a does, it is not
sinful; it is transcendental, the most pure activity. Therefore one . . .
The rascals who do not understand K■■■a, they say that K■■■a is immoral. They do not know what
is K■■■a and what is K■■■a's action. They do not know. They think, "Now, K■■■a is engaging
Arjuna to fight. Oh, it is immoral. Why K■■■a should engage Arjuna in the fighting business?" So
therefore . . . or "Why K■■■a is engaged in dancing with the gop■s? They are wives and sister of
other men. It is sinful." If we enjoy with other's wife or other's daughter or other's sister, who is not bona
fide my wife, if I want to enjoy life, that illicit sex . . . K■■■a is not doing that. But artificially, those who
are nonsense, they see that "K■■■a is dancing at dead of night with others' daughters and girls.
Therefore He is immoral."
But that means he does not know what is K■■■a. K■■■a can do anything. Tej■yasa■ na do■■ya.
Tej■yasa■ na do■■ya (SB 10.33.29). Just like the sun is very powerful. As you see in this material
world a sun, a material thing, and it is very powerful, but the sun is soaking water, taking water from the
sea as well as from filthy place. So he is also taking . . . what is called? Soaking, or . . .?
Devotee: Evaporating.
Prabhup■da: Evaporating, yes. Evaporating water from urine also. In filthy place, sewer ditches, he is
evaporating water, as well as from the sea. But it does not mean by evaporating water from the sewer
ditch and urine, the sun is becoming polluted. No. Rather, he is turning that place, what is called,
prophylactic, antiseptic, by his sunshine. Similarly, even though somebody comes to K■■■a with some
purpose which is not moral, but the man or woman who comes there, he becomes . . . he or she
becomes purified. And K■■■a does not become immoral. This science has to be known by the rascals
before calling K■■■a immoral. Therefore K■■■a says in the Bhagavad-g■t■:
These rascals, they do not know what is K■■■a. They think K■■■a is ordinary man. "Why He is
engaging Arjuna in the fighting? Why He is dancing with others' daughter and girls? These are immoral
thing." Therefore this r■sa dance should not be discussed among the fools and rascals. They'll
misunderstand. Although the professional reciters, they take part, whenever they speak of Bh■gavata,
they immediately jump over the r■sa dance. That is not to be done. Caitanya Mah■prabhu never
indulged in such thing. For mass of people He engaged Himself in sa■k■rtana. And when K■■■a's
dealing with the gop■s were discussed, He was discussing amongst three selected devotees:
R■m■nanda R■ya, Svar■pa D■modara and ■ikhi M■hati.
He had thousands and thousands of devotees, but He never discussed K■■■a's r■sa-l■l■ in the
mass of people. Never did it. Therefore it is restricted. K■■■a . . . because they will misunderstand.
These rascals, they do not know what is K■■■a, and they will misunderstand. They will be polluted. Of
course, not polluted, because after all, they will hear about K■■■a. But they may misunderstand. That
is against their making progress to the spiritual life.
So K■■■a is not immoral. K■■■a is not engaging Arjuna to commit such sinful activities, svajana■
hatv■. No. K■■■a is engaging him in His service. So one has to understand that. So when Arjuna will
understand that, "This war, this fighting is not for my sense gratification, it is for K■■■a's sense
gratification . . ." then he agreed, because he is a devotee. Kari■ye vacana■ tava (BG 18.73): "Yes I
shall now act." This is the proposition.
So ■tmendriya-t■pti-v■ñch■ dhare t■ra n■ma k■ma. K■ma means lust. What is lust? Lust means
whenever you try to satisfy your senses, that is called lust. And the same, whenever you try to satisfy
K■■■a's senses, that is love. Practically the same business, but personal and K■■■a. So K■■■a
consciousness movement means we have to act everything for K■■■a under proper direction. We
cannot manufacture that, "I am doing for K■■■a." Then that is another misleading. Therefore we
require the guidance of the spiritual master. K■■■a . . . guru-k■■■a-k■p■ya (CC Madhya 19.151). It
is Caitanya-carit■m■ta, that you have to seek the mercy both of K■■■a and guru, not that you have
become so advanced that you are directly in connection with K■■■a, and whatever you are doing, it is
mercy. No. Don't think like that. It must be guided, it must be confirmed by guru. Guru-k■■■a-k■p■ya
p■ya bhakti-lat■-b■ja (CC Madhya 19.151). Bhakti line is there.
So our business is, K■■■a consciousness movement, is that we have to satisfy K■■■a. That
reference by that Professor Zaehner, that one rogue, he did by his whims, and he alleged that "After
reading Bhagavad-g■t■ violence, he committed this violence," so did he take permission from K■■■a
or K■■■a's representative? But he does not know the technique. He has unnecessarily accused,
committed a great offense to the lotus feet of K■■■a. So therefore un . . . inexperienced person, they
should not try to teach Bhagavad-g■t■ to others, because he has no knowledge. This knowledge has
to be received by parampar■ system. Evam parampar■-pr■ptam ima■ r■jar■ayo vidu■ (BG 4.2). So
simply by academic career, by knowledge of A-B-C-D, you cannot understand Bhagavad-g■t■. In the
Bhagavad-g■t■ it is said, bhakto si priyo 'si me (BG 4.3), without becoming bhakta . . .
Therefore San■tana Gosv■m■ has forbidden that, "Don't hear anything about K■■■a from a person
who is not a Vai■■ava." Avai■■ava-mukhodg■r■a-p■ta-hari-kath■m■ta■ ■ravana■ na karta . . .
this is prohibited. You cannot hear. But this audience or the students, they also do not know that, "Here
is a rascal. He is not a devotee; he is not a Vai■■ava. Why shall we hear from him Bhagavad-g■t■?"
The first condition is bhakto 'si. And the prohibition is also by ■c■ryas.
Avai■■ava-mukhodg■r■a-p■ta-hari-kath■m■ta■ ■ravana■ na kartavyam. P■ta-hari-kath■m■tam.
Hari-kath■, talks of K■■■a, they are by themselves pure. But still, it is prohibited that if it is spoken by
avai■■ava, nondevotee, one should not hear. Should not hear. Must immediately reject. First of all, we
have to see who is going to speak about K■■■a. Is it a devotee of K■■■a? Is he a Vai■■ava or not?
If he is not, then immediately reject, "Oh, we are not going to hear from you."
But people do not know. Any rascal speaking about Bhagavad-g■t■ we hear. That is not the process.
Then you will misunderstand. Avai■■ava-mukhod . . . sarpocchi■■a■ payo yath■. Just like milk is
very good food, everyone knows. But when it is touched by the tongue of the serpent, it is poison,
immediately. So we cannot drink poison. Don't hear Bhagavad-g■t■ or any talk about K■■■a from a
person who is not a Vai■■ava, who is not a devotee of K■■■a. We'll misunderstand.
Just like they will say, then will say: "Oh, K■■■a is engaging Arjuna for fighting, for committing so
many sinful activities." No, that is not the fact. K■■■a is engaging Arjuna fighting, to fighting, just to
serve His purpose. Paritr■■■ya s■dh■n■■ vin■■■ya ca du■k■tam (BG 4.8). And K■■■a is
executing the mission of K■■■a not for his personal benefit. These are the things.
That's all right. Thank you very much.
Devotees: All glories . . . (end)
