Prabhup■da:
An■rya-ju■■am, "Not at all befitting a man who knows the progressive values of life." ■ryan. ■ryan
means who are progressive. So this dejection of Arjuna in the battlefield is described as befitting a
non-■ryan.
■ryan, according to ■ryan civilization as described in the Bhagavad-g■t■, there are four divisions
inaugurated by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As we have already explained, dharma■ tu
s■k■■d bhagavat-pra■■tam (SB 6.3.19). Any systematic religious process is to be understood: "It is
given by God." Man cannot make any religious system.
So this ■ryan system, progressive system, is c■tur-var■ya■ may■ s■■■a■
gu■a-karma-vibh■ga■a■ (BG 4.13). K■■■a says: "It is introduced by Me for very good management
of the social order"—br■hmin, k■atriya, vai■ya, ■■dra. So Arjuna belonged to the k■atriya family.
Therefore his hesitation to fight in the battlefield is not befitting the ■ryan. For the royal order to become
nonviolent, this is not good. The k■atriyas, when they are fighting in the battlefield, the killing is not a
sin for them.
Similarly, a br■hmin, when he's offering sacrifice, sometimes animals are sacrificed; so that does not
mean that he is committing sin. This animal sacrifice was made not for eating the animals. It was for
testing the Vedic mantra. Whether the br■hmins who were engaged in offering sacrifice, whether they
were chanting the Vedic mantra in right way, that was tested by offering one animal and again giving
the animal a new youth life.
That was animal sacrifice. Sometimes horses, sometimes cows were offered. But in this age, Kali-yuga,
they are forbidden because there is no such y■jñika-br■hmin. All kinds of sacrifices are forbidden in
this age.
A■vamedha sacrifice, gomedha sacrifice, sanny■sa, and to get child by devara, husband's younger
brother, these things are forbidden in this age.
So it was the duty of the k■atriya to fight. Therefore K■■■a is condemning his behavior that, "This is
not befitting a k■atriya. By this action, you will be defamed." Ak■rti-karam arjuna (BG 2.2). "You are
such a nice fighter, soldier, and if you cease to fight, then the other party will defame you in so many
ways. What you are thinking of? Especially you are My friend. I am standing here. Despite My
becoming your chariot driver, if you decline to fight, certainly it will be a great havoc. Don't do this."
Therefore He says, an■rya-ju■■am asvargyam. Asvargyam means "You cannot be promoted to the
heavenly planet." It is said that a k■atriya who dies in the fight is immediately promoted to the heavenly
planet. But because he is dying for the good cause, therefore he is promoted. Asvargyam ak■rti-karam.
"It is defamation on your part." So:
Parantapa means one who can give trouble to the enemies. It is the duty of the k■atriya. Enemies,
aggressor, they should be killed. There is no ■tat■y■. ■tat■y■ means one who is aggressor. One
who kidnaps one's wife, one who take away by force one's wealth, one who sets fire in one's house,
these are called aggressor. So aggressor should be killed. Aggressor should be given trouble.
So K■■■a does not teach unnecessarily nonviolence. If k■atriya becomes nonviolent, then the whole
state will be in chaos. They must learn how to kill any criminal. He should be immediately killed. Just
like Mah■r■ja Par■k■it, Arjuna's grandson, when he was touring in his empire . . .
The whole world was at that time Indian empire. Not Indian exactly. Bh■rata-var■a. Now we have
imitated some name, Bh■rata, the "Indian," "Hindustan." But formerly the whole planet was known as
Bh■rata-var■a. So when he saw that one black man was trying to kill one cow, immediately he took his
sword: "Immediately I shall kill you. Who are you, killing cows in my kingdom?" This is k■atriya's
business.
So . . . but there is no k■atriya now, because so many cows are being killed. Who is . . . nobody is
protesting. It is the duty of the k■atriya to protect every living entity born in the land, in his kingdom. It is
not that, as it is going on now, that only the human beings should be protected and not the animals. No
animal could be killed except in sacrifice, as prescribed.
Unnecessarily there was no need of killing animals. That is great sin. Dy■ta■ p■na■ striya■ s■n■
yatr■dharma■ catur-vidha■ (SB 1.17.38). Striya, illicit connection with woman, is sinful life.
Unnecessarily killing animals, that is sinful life. Intoxication, that is sinful life. Gambling, that is also
sinful life.
When this Kali was excused, he surrendered himself to Mah■r■ja Par■k■it that, "You have asked me
to go out of your kingdom, but where is out of your kingdom? The whole world is your kingdom. So
kindly give me some place where I can stay."
So Mah■r■ja Par■k■it gave him these four places that, "You can stay where illicit sex life is going on."
That mean prostitution. "And unnecessary animals are killed, slaughterhouse."
Striya-s■n■-p■na-dy■ta (SB 1.17.38). "Where intoxicants are indulged in or gambling. In these four
places you can stay."
So at that time, Kali could not find out such place throughout the whole world. So he was disturbed. So
there was conspiracy to kill Mah■r■ja Par■k■it because the Kali could understand that so long
Mah■r■ja Par■k■it would live, it is impossible to find out a slaughterhouse or a brothel or a drinking
house or gambling place. No.
So the kingdom was so nice. We have got description from ■r■mad-Bh■gavatam. Mah■r■ja
Par■k■it, Mah■r■ja Yudhi■■hira, many. The monarchy was so nice that because they were trained
up, r■jar■i . . . they were not ordinary kings. They were as good as great sages and great saintly
person.
Ima■ r■jar■ayo vidu■ (BG 4.2). K■■■a said, ima■ vivasvate yoga■ proktav■n aham avyayam (BG
4.1). K■■■a said to the sun-god, Vivasv■n. So He said: "The sun-god transferred the teaching to his
son Manu, and Manu transferred the teaching to Mah■r■ja Ik■v■ku." Eva■ parampar■-pr■ptam (BG
4.2). In this way, the point is that the philosophy of Bhagavad-g■t■ was especially taught to the royal
order because they would know. They should know. Because a king is supposed to be representative
of God, nara-deva. King is addressed as nara-deva.
Even in five hundred years ago, when San■tana Gosv■m■ was minister of Nawab Hussain Shah . . .
San■tana Gosv■m■ wanted to resign. He wanted to join Caitanya Mah■prabhu's movement. So when
the Nawab understood that San■tana Gosv■m■ . . . his name was Dabira Kh■sa; he changed his
name. So he said: "No, you cannot resign. Then my whole kingdom will be topsy-turvied. I completely
depend . . . dependent on you." So San■tana Gosv■m■ said: "My, Your Majesty, I am not . . . no more
able to serve you. Kindly excuse me." Then the Nawab said that, "Then I shall punish you. I am Nawab.
I am king." So San■tana Gosv■m■ said: "Yes, you can punish me because you are representative of
God." He never protested, "Oh, you are Muhammadan, I am this, Hindu or . . ." No. He accepted him
that, "You can punish me."
So the idea is that formerly the monarch, the king, was actually representative of God. They used to
rule in such a nice way that nobody was unhappy. During Mah■r■ja Yudhi■■hira's ruling, reign, you
will find in the Bh■gavatam that people were so happy that they had no anxiety. Not only they were free
from all anxieties, but they had not to bear even scorching heat or shivering cold. No. So they were so
happy.
That is the duty of the government. It may be monarchy or democracy; the first duty of the government
is to see that all the citizens, they are feeling happy. That is the duty of the government. Not simply
collecting taxes and "All the citizens may go to hell. It doesn't matter." This is not good government.
Good government is to see there are . . . it may be secular government.
The secular government does not mean that the whole citizens should be religious . . . less religious,
godless. Secular government should see that even there are many religious sects, just like Hindus or
Muslim and Christians, so secular government does not mean that they should neglect. They should
see that the Hindus are strictly following the principles of Hindu religion, the Muhammadans are strictly
following the principles of Muhammadan religion or . . . that is government's duty. Nobody should
remain unemployed. That is government's duty.
There are so many things. They are all described in connection with Mah■r■ja P■thu, one noble king.
So in Bh■gavata you'll find everything. Politics, sociology, religion, culture, philosophy—everything you
will find. Vidy■ bh■gavata vadni■. All kinds of cultural and educational instruction are there in the
■r■mad-Bh■gavatam. So:
"Give up this cowardice habit. You get up and prepare for your fight. This is k■atriya's business. You
should not go behind." Arjuna uv■ca. "Arjuna replied."
Now K■■■a was encouraging to fight; Arjuna was also very intelligently replying. He addressed
K■■■a as Madhus■dana, Aris■dana. Madhus■dana means "The killer of Madhu demon," or "The
killer of enemy." So his purpose is that, "I have to kill Bh■■madeva, who is my so kind grandfather, and
I have to kill Dro■■c■rya, who is my teacher, from whom I have learned this military art.
So You have killed the demons and Your enemy, and why You are inducing me to kill my guru and my
grandfather?" This is his argument. Katha■ bh■■mam aha■ sa■khye dro■a■ ca madhus■dana,
i■ubhi■ pratiyotsy■mi (BG 2.4): "They, my grandfather, my teacher, may chastise me, but how I can
pierce with arrows their body?"
So this is the problem, duty. Arjuna was forgetting duty. And K■■■a was inducing him: "Never mind.
According to k■atriya rules and regulation, even the opposite party is your own son, you should not
hesitate to kill him. This is k■atriya's business." If the opposite party is your own son, but when there is
fight, there must be decided: one party must be killed. This is k■atriya's business.
So he says, gur■n ahatv■ hi mah■nubh■v■n (BG 2.5). "These guru, this Dro■■c■rya and Bh■■ma,
they are not ordinary men." Mah■nubh■v■n. Bh■■ma, everyone knows. Bh■■ma is one of the
authorities, authorities of religious principle. There are twelve authorities.
There are four . . . twelve authorities. One of them is Bh■■ma. Prahl■do janako bh■■mo balir
vaiy■sakir vayam.
So Bh■■ma is not ordinary person. Therefore he said, katham, gur■n ahatv■ hi mah■nubh■v■n
■reyo bhoktu■ bhaik■yam ap■ha loke (BG 2.5). "I do not like to kill my guru, who is so great, and my
grandfather. Better I shall become a beggar." A k■atriya's business is not to beg. A br■hmin can beg.
A br■hmin can accept charity, but k■atriya cannot accept any charity from anyone else, neither he can
come down to do business like the vai■yas. That is not. Everyone should stick to his own principle.
If this is followed, then it is really secular government. A government must see whether—you are
claiming as a br■hmin—whether you are actually discharging your duties as a br■hmin. That is secular
government. You are claiming as a k■atriya; whether you are discharging your duties as a k■atriya?
You are a vai■ya; whether you are discharging your duties as vai■ya? This is government's duty. That
is c■tur-var■ya■ may■ s■■■am (BG 4.13). Now they are eager to wash off this social system. They
want classless society. But in the material world there cannot be any classless society. It is not
possible.
Classless society can be established in the spiritual world. Just like we are propagating this K■■■a
consciousness movement. This is classless society. Here you will find Europeans, Americans, Indians,
Africans, Hindus, Muslim, Christians, but they have forgotten that they are Hindus, Muslims or
Christians or Americans or Indians. They are all identifying, "We are all servant of K■■■a." This is
classless society. This is classless society. There is no distinction. Here a Hindu coming from very
respectable br■hmin family and another man is coming from the dog-eater's family. It doesn't matter.
As soon as one becomes Vai■■ava, he is classless society.
Therefore it is forbidden, vai■■ave j■ti-buddhi■. Arcye vi■■au ■il■-dh■r guru■u nara-matir
vai■■ave j■ti-buddhi■, n■rak■ (Padma Pur■■a). Just like we should not consider this Deity before
us as made of some metal or wood. No. Arcye ■il■-dh■■. No. Here is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead standing. We should take it like that. Otherwise, does it mean that we are offering our
obeisances to a metal doll? We have become so fool? No. We take it, "Here is K■■■a personally
standing." That is the, that, if one cannot feel like that . . . the ■■stra says you should feel like that.
Arcye ■il■-dh■r guru■u nara-mati■. Guru, a spiritual master, should not be considered as ordinary
human being. Guru■u nara-mati■. The Ganges water, one should not think that it is ordinary water. Or
cara■■m■ta. These are forbidden. Similarly, vai■■ave j■ti-buddhi■. One should not think, "He is
American Vai■■ava," "He is br■hmin Vai■■ava," "He is African Vai■■ava," "He is black Vai■■ava,"
"He is white Vai■■ava." No. Vai■■ava is Vai■■ava, servant of God.
Just like in the Ganges water, there are so many . . . in Calcutta I have seen so many mill water
coming, sewer ditches' water is coming. But when it falls down on the Ganges water, it is no more any
other water; everything is Ganges water. Practically we accept it. In Calcutta there are many rigid
Hindus, br■hmins, they are taking bath in the Ganges, but even stool is floating there, they set it aside
and take bath, Ganges water.
Actually, you see chemically, although so many unclean water is coming there, it is still pure. Similarly,
Vai■■ava, he may come from any family, it doesn't matter. He becomes immediately transcendental.
K■■■a says in the Bhagavad-g■t■:
Immediately he becomes. We are trying to become, to understand aha■ brahm■smi. So this
realization immediately become effective if one is a pure devotee. M■■ ca 'vyabhic■re■a
bhakti-yogena ya■ sevate, sa gu■■n samat■tyait■n (BG 14.26). He is above all these three qualities.
So if actually you want to make classless society, then you have to accept this K■■■a consciousness
movement. There is no other way. If you make artificially classless society, it will never be effective.
The Communists are trying to make classless society. That classless society can be formed on spiritual
platform, not on the material platform. This will be artificial. Pa■■it■■ sama-dar■ina■ (BG 5.18).
When one is actually advanced in knowledge . . .
Advanced with knowledge means one should understand that, "I am eternal servant of K■■■a, or
God." That is advancement of knowledge. Aha■ brahm■smi: "I am not this body; I am spirit soul. And
K■■■a is the Supreme Soul. I am part and parcel of K■■■a." Brahm■-bh■ta■ prasann■tm■ na
■ocati na k■■k■ati (BG 18.54). Simply by understanding that, "I am spirit soul, I am Brahman," will not
help us. You must act like Brahman. Then it will be . . . janma . . . gu■a-karma-vibh■ga■a■ (BG 4.13).
There must be realization; that is gu■a. At the same time, there must be practical work.
That is Vedic civilization. You should not claim falsely. If you are actually br■hmin, you must act as a
br■hmin. If you are a k■atriya, you must act as a k■atriya. Gu■a-karma-vibh■ga■a■. Not that "I am a
br■hmin; now I have become something else." Just like in Calcutta we have seen there are small
slaughterhouses, and they have posted one deity, Goddess K■l■, and have got sacred thread, and the
signboard is: "This meat is sacri . . . slaughtered by a br■hmin; therefore it is pure." "Therefore it is
pure." And that is going on. Oh, the meat-eaters, they take all this meat, and they think, "It is the
pras■da of Goddess K■l■, and it is slaughtered by a br■hmin. There is no sin; it is all right." This is
going on.
No. br■hmin is not meant for becoming a slaughterer, a killer. No. br■hmin should be truthful. br■hmin
should be cleansed, no sinful life. br■hmin should be controlling the senses, controlling the mind.
br■hmin must be well-educated, jñ■na, and he must apply the knowledge in practical life and believe in
the Vedic injunctions. These are the qualifications of br■hmin. Similarly, there are qualification of
k■atriyas, vai■yas. We should follow that.
And it is the duty of the government to see that, "This man is claiming as a br■hmin, whether he is
actually executing the duties of br■hmin?" That is government's duty. Not that they should simply fight
that "I am br■hmin," "I am k■atriya," "I am Hindu," "I am Muslim." No. The government's duty is to see
that actually whether he is as he claims to be.
So Arjuna says that, "I do not like to kill my grandfather or my guru." Not only ordinary guru . . . Guru is
never ordinary. Guru, that I have explained—never we should consider guru as ordinary human being.
Guru means as king is the representative for giving protection to the people, similarly, a guru or
br■hmin is also meant for giving protection to the people from spiritual side. The king, k■atriya, is
meant for giving protection to the people from material side. The vai■ya is to produce from the material
side. Everything is systematically arranged.
So br■hmin means the intelligent class of men, k■atriya means the administrative class of men, and
vai■ya means the productive class of men, and the ■■dra means ordinary worker. These divisions are
everywhere. You cannot say that only the br■hmins and k■atriyas and vai■yas are in India. No. When
it is a creation of K■■■a, or God, it must be everywhere—in every planet, in every country, every city.
Because anywhere you go, either in Europe or America, you will find some classes of men very
intelligent class. They are interested in philosophy, science. Similarly, there is a class of men who are
interested in politics. They are k■atriyas, you can say. Similarly, there are persons who are interested
in making money, vai■yas. And there are ordinary class of men, they neither br■hmin nor k■atriya nor
. . . they cannot live independently.
■■dra means he must find out a master. A master. Paricary■tmaka■ karma ■■dra-karma
svabh■va-jam (BG 18.44). ■■dra's business is to find out a master. Just like a dog: a dog must find
out a nice master. Otherwise it is a street dog; its condition is not very good. Similarly, a ■■dra means
he must have a nice paying master. Otherwise his life is at risk. So if you consider in that way, the
■■stra says, kalau ■■dra-sambhava■.
In this Kali-yuga, everyone is a ■■dra. You hardly find a real br■hmin or real k■atriya or vai■ya.
Because they are after service. In the ■■stra it is said that a br■hmin, if he is in difficulty, he may take
the profession of a k■atriya or up to a vai■ya, but never take the business of a ■■dra, like a dog. That
is prohibited. And nowadays we are claiming to become br■hmin and going here and there with
application, "If there is any vacancy, sir?"
So these things are topsy-turvied. Simply it has become a farce. Actually if we want to establish Vedic
civilization, then we must follow strictly the principles of Vedas as it is described in the Bhagavad-g■t■.
And if it is practiced, then daiva-var■■■rama-dharma. That is required.
Daiva-var■■■rama-dharma. There must be the four division. Just like we have got four divisions in our
body: the head division, the arm division, the belly division and the leg division. The leg division is the
■■dra, the belly division is the vai■ya, and the arm division is the k■atriya, and the head division is the
br■hmin.
So these divisions are now lost. Actually, there is no k■atriya, no br■hmin. Maybe there are some
vai■yas and ■■dras. So suppose if your whole body there is only belly and leg, then what is the body?
If you have no head and no arm, then how it is? What kind of body it is? So therefore, in the social order
of the present day, there is no br■hmin, no k■atriya. Only there are some few vai■yas and ■■dras. So
therefore there is chaos all over the world.
So this K■■■a consciousness movement is meant for creating some real br■hmin. At least, there may
be head. They are all mad after the influence of the material energy. So there is need of some br■hmin
who can give advice to the people how to lead, how to become God conscious, how to become happy.
There is great need of this movement. Simply so-called classless society will not help us. That is not
Vedic civilization.
So Arjuna is giving his nice argument that, "If I kill my such great-grandfather and such noble, my
teacher, then after killing them, if I enjoy this world, it will be mixed with blood and fire. So I cannot fight.
I can . . ." Arjuna clearly declined to fight. Then again he says:
He said that, "After killing my family men . . ." Dh■tar■■■ra, dh■rtar■■■r■■, p■■■av■■ . . .
Dh■tar■■■ra and P■■■u, they were two brothers, and their sons, cousin-brothers. So generally,
people want to increase his material opulence to show to his friends and relatives. When one person
constructs a very new, very nice house, he invites his relatives and his friends to show them that, "Now
I have become so opulent."
So Arjuna is thinking in that term that, "Suppose I conquer over and I get the kingdom. But if my
relatives and brothers are dead, whom shall I show?" This is another kind of vair■gya: how this
material relationship makes one foolish, Arjuna is playing the part of a foolish man, and K■■■a will
chastise him. We shall see later on.
Thank you very much. Hare K■■■a. (break)
Indian man: I have got a doubt about this Hira■y■k■a, Prahl■da's father . . .
Prabhup■da: Hira■yaka■ipu.
Indian man: Hira■yaka■ipu. Because God has taken the shape of a Narasi■ha Swami, and then He
finishes him by tearing his stomach. And then He takes all the intestines and pushes out. That is the
pictures normally shown. What is the significance, and how this is actually, what it is meaning? Whether
He is . . . why He is . . . this sort of picture is being given and everywhere I see this picture in bazaar
and everywhere right from my childhood I have been seeing this. What does this signify?
Prabhup■da: It is no significant. Ke■ava dh■ta-nara-hari-r■pa.
So K■■■a assumed the nara-hari, n■si■ha-r■pa, half man, half lion. So these are description in the
■■stras.
So there is no significance. This Hira■yaka■ipu wanted to become immortal. Then, when he was
refused by Lord Brahm■ that, "You cannot become immortal; that is not possible," then, in a
roundabout way, he took benediction from Lord Brahm■ that he would not die on land, on water, on the
sky; no weapon can kill him, no demigod can kill him. In this way, roundabout way, he thought now he
has become immortal.
So to keep the words of Brahm■ as it is, the Lord assumed a form which is not within his description.
And instead of killing him with a weapon He killed him by the nails. Nail is not considered as a weapon.
So He killed him between day and night, because he also took benediction that, "I shall not die during
daytime or nighttime."
So God, K■■■a, is so intelligent that we may try to become immortal by so many scientific brain, but
there will be some flaw, and he wants . . . must be killed. This is God's intelligence
Indian lady: Sw■m■j■, what would happen if a person . . . (indistinct)
Prabhup■da: I cannot follow. Eh?
Indian lady: (indistinct about animals)
Pradyumna: (explaining) Someone in college, if they start to study biology or zoology, it involves killing
animals, dissection. Is that a sin?
Prabhup■da: Yes, certainly. You cannot kill even an ant.
Indian lady: Then you should give up such study?
Prabhup■da: That is your business. What can I say? (chuckles) (laughter) But any kind of animal killing
is sin, sinful. (break) K■■■a says:
K■■■a says that, "I am the seed-giving father of all living entities in any form." Sarva-yoni■u. Sarva
means all, 8,400,000 species and forms. So K■■■a is the father, and all living entities are part and
parcel of the Lord. They have different dresses according to different karma, but actually, every living
entity is part and parcel of God, sons.
So suppose a father has got ten sons and one of them or two of them are useless. So if the elder
brother wants to make some experiment by killing the younger brother, would the father be pleased?
No. Father will be sorry even the intelligent boy is killed or the dull boy is killed.
For father, there is no such distinction. Similarly, you cannot kill animals without being sanctioned. That
sanction is in the sacrifice, I have already explained, for testing. According to Vedic system, if you kill
anybody, then you must be responsible for the sinful life. (break) (end)
