Pradyumna: O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo
bhagavate v■sudev■ya. (Prabhup■da and devotees repeat) (leads chanting of verse).
(break)
(break) (leads chanting of synonyms)
sañjaya■—Sañjaya; uv■ca—said; evam—thus; ukta■—addressed; h■■■ke■a■—Lord K■■■a;
gu■■ke■ena—by Arjuna; bh■rata—O descendant of Bharata; senayo■—of armies; ubhayo■—of
both; madhye—in the midst of; sth■payitv■—by placing; rathottamam—the finest chariot.
Translation: "Sañjaya said: O descendant of Bharata, being thus addressed by Arjuna, Lord K■■■a
drew up the fine chariot in the midst of the armies of both parties."
bh■■ma—Grandfather Bh■■ma; dro■a—the teacher Dro■a; pramukhata■—in the front of;
sarve■■m—all; ca—also; mah■k■it■m—chiefs of the world; uv■ca—said; p■rtha—O P■rtha (son of
P■th■); pa■ya—just behold; et■n—all of them; samavet■n—assembled; kur■n—all the members of
the Kuru dynasty; iti—thus.
Translation: "In the presence of Bh■■ma, Dro■a and all other chieftains of the world, H■■■ke■a, the
Lord, said: 'Just behold, P■rtha, all the Kurus who are assembled here.' "
Prabhup■da: So, sañjaya uv■ca. Actually Sañjaya, the secretary of Dh■tar■■■ra, he is relating the
activities in the battlefield. Dh■tar■■■ra is blind. How in the battlefield the fighting was going on,
Sañjaya was observing, either by television or a similar method. Otherwise, how he could explain things
are going on in the battlefield in the room? This Bhagavad-g■t■, Sañjaya explained all activities in the
battlefield to Dh■tar■■■ra, within the room. So there must have been something like television, or
higher than the television, he was seeing within himself everything.
So scientific improvement is coming, but still on the material platform. Material means gross material
and subtle material. That is explained in the Bhagavad-g■t■:
Earth, water, fire, air, sky, these five elements are gross material. Everyone can see, gross. We can
see earth, we can see water, we can see fire, air, or we can perceive the sky also. But there are subtle
matter also: mind, intelligence, ego. We cannot see the mind. We cannot see intelligence. I understand
that you have got intelligence, or everyone knows we have got mind, but we cannot see. This is subtle.
They are also matter, subtle matter.
So the television is a machine made of gross matter, but there is possibility of making another machine
of subtle matter. There is possibility. Because matter, they are also matter. That subtle matter machine
is not yet discovered. But here we can see the subtle matter discovery was there. Otherwise, how
Sañjaya could see the activities in the battlefield? This is to be understood. They are very much proud
of material advancement of science, but still, they have to make advancement, subtle matter. And
above that subtle matter, within that subtle matter, there is spiritual identity. Indriy■■i par■■y ■hur
indriyebhya■ para■ mana■, manasas tu par■ buddhi■ (BG 3.42).
First of all we can see a person. A person we see, what do we see? The senses. But we cannot see the
director of the senses. The director of the senses is the mind. And the director of the mind is
intelligence. And the owner of the intelligence is the soul. This is understanding. The soul is there.
Whose intelligence? As soon as we shall say intelligence, whose intelligence? That is the soul's
intelligence. Wherefrom the intelligence is coming? From Param■tm■, H■■■ke■a. Therefore this
word is used here, h■■■ke■a.
The intelligence will come from Param■tm■. Otherwise, we cannot act. Just like a child has got
intelligence, but it is guided by the parent's intelligence, "My dear son, do like this," and he does it.
Similarly, we have got all this mind, intelligence, everything, but that is being guided by the
superintelligence, K■■■a. Therefore He is called H■■■ke■a. Once we have explained H■■■ke■a.
So we have to reach that platform where we can talk with H■■■ke■a. That is spiritual platform. That is
possible. The more you become purified, you can talk with H■■■ke■a, who is within yourself. He is
not outside. Although He is in Goloka V■nd■vana—K■■■a is always in V■nd■vana, in the spiritual
world—but because He is K■■■a, He can remain with you also at the same time, simultaneously. This
is K■■■a. Goloka eva nivasaty akhil■tma-bh■ta■ (Bs. 5.37).
It is proposed, our M■y■pur temple will be on this plan. Goloka-n■mni nija-dh■mni tale ca tasya.
The highest planetary system, spiritual, that is spiritual planet, that is named goloka-n■mni, Goloka
V■nd■vana. We have given that picture in the Bh■gavata cover. Perhaps you know. The topmost
original planet is the Goloka. Goloka-n■mni nija-dh■mni. That is the abode of K■■■a,
k■■■a-dh■ma. K■■■a-dh■ma. People are searching after God, but actually there is the planet
where God lives, K■■■a lives. But you have got your machine, aeroplane, sputnik.
You can reach there. But you cannot reach even the highest planet even on this material planet,
material universe. Everyone sees. We see the stars or planets. Now you have got the machine; you go
there. No. You cannot go. You are so limited. Even you cannot go to the moon planet, which is so
nearest. You cannot go. But still, we are proud of our these airplanes, sputniks. We are thinking, "Now
we have become God."
These rascals they do not know what is God. They are all rascals. They have no idea what is God.
Therefore they have accepted another rascal as God. This is going on. You cannot reach. Panth■s tu
ko■i-■ata-vatsara-sampragamyo v■yor ath■pi manaso muni-pu■gav■n■m, so 'pyasti yat
prapada-s■mny avicintya-tattve (Bs. 5.34), ■■stra gives you. Just like your material science also gives
you information that there is one planet, highest planet, and one can go there by sputnik in forty
thousands of years. So who is going to live forty thousand years to reach there? But they have got
theoretically all these things. The highest planet. Material. That is not spiritual.
So after finishing this material world, there is covering of the universe, stock matter, mahat-tattva,
wherefrom all these material comings. There is stock. So you have to penetrate through that stock
material. And each layer of stock is ten times more than the other. So you have to pierce through the
stock, material stock; then you reach the spiritual world. And the spiritual world, there are many . . .
"Many" means three times more than these universes. This universe, this material universe, is only
one-fourth manifestation of K■■■a's creation. Ek■■■ena sthito jagat. When Arjuna inquired from
K■■■a, "So would you kindly explain little of Your opulence?" "Yes." So He said: "I am this. Out of this,
I am this," and so on. He summarized:
Ek■■■ena. You are seeing this universe. This universe—only a fragment of the material creation. A
fragment. Caitanya Mah■prabhu informed us . . . one of His devotee requested Caitanya Mah■prabhu,
"My dear Lord, You have come personally. You kindly take all the living entities to the spiritual world. Be
kind enough upon them. And if You think that they are so sinful they cannot be taken, then transfer all
their sins unto me. You take them. You take them."
So Caitanya Mah■prabhu began to smile that, "Even if I take the all the living entities of the universe,
but do you know, this universe is only one fragmental part of other, all other universes. There are many
other universes." And He compared that, "In a bag where . . . bag full of mustard seeds"—just imagine
a big bag of mustard seeds—"and this universe is just like one mustard seed." There are so many
universes. So many universes.
And it is confirmed in the Brahma-sa■hit■: yasya prabh■ prabhavato jagad-a■■a-ko■i (Bs. 5.40).
Jagad-a■■a. Jagad-a■■a means this universe. Brahm■■■a, jagad-a■■a. Ko■i, innumerable.
Jagad-a■■a-ko■i. Yasya prabh■ prabhavato jagad-a■■a-ko■i-ko■i■v
a■e■a-vasudh■di-vibh■ti-bhinnam (Bs. 5.40). And each universe there are innumerable planets. And
each planet is different from others. This is God's creation. And these rascal are manufacturing God.
And there is other description also: yasyaika-ni■vasita-k■lam ath■valambya j■vanti loma-vilaj■
jagad-a■■a-n■th■■ (Bs. 5.48). This jagad-a■■a, the universe. And there, in each universe, there is a
controller of the universe, Brahm■. He is called jagad-a■■a-n■tha, master of this universe. Because it
is controlled by Brahm■, therefore each universe is called brahm■■■a. It is controlled by Brahm■. So
in the Brahma-sa■hit■ we get information: jagad-a■■a-n■th■■, plural number. There are many,
many thousands jagad-a■■a . . .
Not only one Brahm■. Many millions of Brahm■s, many millions of ■iva, many millions of Vi■■u, many
millions of sun. Many . . . because there are many millions of universes. Now, just imagine. This is
material creation. And that material creation, K■■■a says, ek■■■ena sthito jagat (BG 10.42). Taking
all the material universes, it is only one-fourth creation of the Lord. And the three-fourth creation is the
spiritual world. Just imagine what is spiritual world. And in that spiritual, the topmost planet is Goloka.
So you cannot go even in the moon planet. How you can go to that spiritual planet, penetrating the
material coverings coming to the spiritual effulgence, Brahman, and after all these universes, then . . .?
Therefore it is said, panth■s tu ko■i-■ata-vatsara-sampragamya■ (Bs. 5.34). Ko■i-■ata-vatsara,
millions of years, if you go with your sputnik with full force . . . panth■s tu ko■i-■ata-vatsara. Not this
Sputnik, but make your planes of mind speed. This is material speed. What is this speed? A few
thousands, twenty thousand, fifty thousand. But do you know mind speed? You are sitting here, and
immediately, within a second, you can go to India. This is mind speed. Immediately.
So panth■s tu ko■i-■ata-vatsara sampragamyo v■yor ath■pi (Bs. 5.34). By the air speed or mind
speed. V■yor ath■pi manaso muni-pu■gav■n■m. And driven by great scientists, muni-pu■gava.
Pu■gava means very expert, nara-pu■gava. So big, big scientist, expert scientist, if they can discover
airplane which is running on mind speed or air speed . . . they are not . . . they cannot go by the air
speed. They fly on the air, but not with the air speed. So in this way, still, avicintya-tattve, after going
many, many millions of years in that speed, still you will find, "Oh, Goloka V■nd■vana is far, far away."
This is the position.
So that K■■■a . . . and we are explaining what is K■■■a. Don't consider K■■■a is ordinary human
being. Avaj■nanti m■■ m■■h■ m■nu■■■ tanum ■■ritam (BG 9.11). Because He kindly appears
before us just like ordinary human being, don't think that He is like us. It is the conclusion. Just like
these rascals, they think that "Because K■■■a appeared as a human being, I am also God. I am also
God. Why K■■■a shall be alone God?" So we are trying to explain what is K■■■a, H■■■ke■a.
H■■■ke■a. Then goloka-n■mni. Goloka eva nivasaty akhil■tma-bh■ta■. Goloka eva nivasati.
So our worship is very subtle. Tam aha■ bhaj■mi. We worship that Govinda, ■di-puru■am. Govindam
■di-puru■a■ tam aha■ bhaj■mi. We don't worship ordinary so-called rascals. We worship Govinda.
How Govinda is? The Govinda's description is Brahma-sa■hit■. That Govinda,
■nanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibh■vit■bhi■: "He is always in the spiritual world, which is
■nanda-cinmaya-rasa." Not this kind of ■nanda—cinmay■nanda, spiritual bliss.
Spiritual bliss means it is continually going on; still, nobody is fed up. Here you can accept any ■nanda
in this material world, so many things. It cannot go on very long time. Suppose if I give you rasagull■,
one rasagull■, you can take, "Oh, very nice." Another, "Very nice." Another, "Nice." You see? Then
next four or five, "No, I do not want." Finished. Similarly, any ■nanda you can take. Sex life. It cannot
be continued. Finished. So try to understand what is cinmay■nanda. ■nanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibh■ . .
. it . . . they'll never ends. It goes, nava-nava-yauvana, one after another, new, new, new, new. Just try
to understand what is spiritual bliss. You do not . . . the sahajiy■s, they accept this material bliss as
spiritual bliss. That is called sahajiy■. Don't be sahajiy■s. Try to understand according to ■■stra.
So K■■■a is described, this how He becomes H■■■ke■a, that goloka eva nivasati. He is enjoying
with His associates, the cowherds boy, the gop■s, in goloka-n■mni nija-dh■mni. He is enjoying there.
At the same time, He is within your heart. This is K■■■a, H■■■ke■a. He's come simultaneously, not
only within your heart, within the atom. A■■■ntara-stha-param■■u-cay■ntara-stha■ govindam
■di-puru■a■ tam aham . . . (Bs. 5.35). Not only within your heart, but within the atom. Just imagine
how many atoms there are. So K■■■a is everywhere.
These are . . . we have to take information of K■■■a from the ■■stra. ■■stram eva cak■us■.
Ved■nta-s■tra. Your eyes should be ■■stra, not your so-called imagination. ■■stra-cak■us■. Ya■
■■stra-vidhim uts■jya vartate k■ma . . . (BG 16.23). If you give up the direction of the ■■stra and
manufacture your own way, ya■ ■■stra-vidhim uts■jya vartate k■ma-k■rata■, as you like, then na sa
siddhim av■pnoti: you will never get siddhi, perfection. Never get. Na sa siddhim av■p . . . na sukham,
neither happiness.
And what to speak of par■■ gatim, going back to home, back to Godhead. So ■■stra-cak■us■.
Everything we have to take from the ■■stra. Because we are blind now. ■■stra-cak■us■. Our, the
■■stra-jñ■na, because the spiritual master enlightens the disciple with ■■stra-jñ■na, therefore he is
spiritual master. If the spiritual master bluffs the disciple, then he is not spiritual master. Bluffing. No.
This is guru. Guru means he'll always enlighten the disciples with the light of ■■stra. Not that he will
say: "There is no need of ■■stra. I am incarnation. I, whatever I speak, you take it." No. This is rascal.
You should immediately, who has no reference to the ■■stra, immediately take him as a rascal number
one. This is the conclusion.
So here is ■■stra, Bhagavad-g■t■. H■■■ke■a. We have already explained one day. Here also,
again we are explaining. H■■■ke■a. K■■■a. K■■■a is there. He never leaves from V■nd■vana. He
is there. Why? Here also. Just like we see, a very rich man, a very influential man, the president, he
lives in his . . . the Queen, she is in the Buckingham Palace. But she cannot go at the same time
anywhere and everywhere. No. She is in . . . packed up in Buckingham Palace. K■■■a is not like that.
Therefore He is H■■■ke■a. Try to understand the distinction between K■■■a and others. K■■■a is
goloka eva nivasaty akhil■tma-bh■ta■ (Bs. 5.37). ■tma-bh■ta. This ■tma-bh■ta is H■■■ke■a. He is
giving intelligence. The more you become purified, the more you get direct instruction from
H■■■ke■a. This is the point.
So how you can become purified? Purified means no more influenced by the modes of material nature.
That is explained: gu■■ke■a. Gu■■ka ■■a. Gu■■ka means darkness, and ■■a, when you become
master of this material world, or material senses. This material world means material senses. That's all.
So if you become master of the material senses, then you become gu■■ke■a. Therefore Arjuna is
described here as gu■■ke■a.
Arjuna . . . don't take Arjuna that he was mistaken. No, he cannot be. How he can be? He is constantly
with K■■■a. How he can be misdirected? No. That is not possible. In the Caitanya-carit■m■ta it is
said that k■■■a s■rya-sama m■y■ andhak■ra (CC Madhya 22.31). So gu■■ka means darkness,
m■y■. So k■■■a s■rya-sama m■y■ andhak■ra. The darkness and light is there always, side by
side. We have got experience. Here is sunlight, here is darkness. So these two things are there. So:
Wherever there is K■■■a, there is no jurisdiction of darkness, or m■y■.
You can become immediately out of the scope of m■y■ if you always remain surrendered to K■■■a.
M■y■ will not touch you. Just like if you remain always in the sunshine, there is no question of night.
Nowadays it is very easy. If you simply drive your plane on the western side, you'll never get night. You
just round about. Yes. It is . . . just like it is materially possible. You drive your plane simply on the
western side. Start your plane in the morning and go to the western side and don't stop it. You go on for
three, four, as many days as you like, you'll never get night. This is practical. Similarly, if you keep
always with K■■■a, you are gu■■ke■a—you will never get darkness. Or m■y■ will not touch you.
This is K■■■a consciousness. So try to become gu■■ke■a.
The next verse: K■■■a, H■■■ke■a. So He knew the sarvasya c■ha■ h■di sannivi■■a■ (BG
15.15). K■■■a is there. K■■■a knows what is your purpose, what you want to do, what is your past,
future. Everything K■■■a knows. Everything K■■■a knows. That is explained in the Bhagavad-g■t■.
Ved■ha■ samat■t■ni (BG 7.26): "I know everything." So K■■■a, sth■payitv■, rathottama■
sth■payitv■. As soon as Arjuna asked Him, senayor ubhayor madhye ratha■ sth■paya me 'cyuta (BG
1.21), immediately He carried out the order and He knew why he wants. He wanted to see, "With whom
I have to fight, my friends and relatives." He's hesitating.
So why this ignorance of Arjuna, the question may be. Arjuna is gu■■ke■a. He is above this material
world. How he is being affected by his so-called relatives and kinsmen? He was hesitating to fight on
this principle that, "They are my relatives. They are my kinsmen. They are my family members." He was
always thinking. Therefore K■■■a knew it. So he has become so family-wise infected. But he is
gu■■ke■a. How it is possible? He is above all these things. Yes, he is above all these things. By
K■■■a's desire, he is playing like that, ordinary man. Otherwise, how Bhagavad-g■t■ will come?
K■■■a cannot talk with ordinary person. K■■■a cannot fight with ordinary person.
Even the demons, when they come . . . just like Hira■y■k■a, Hira■yaka■ipu. They were Jaya-Vijaya
in the Vaiku■■ha world. So they came here, and K■■■a asked them that, "If you become My enemy,
then within three births you will come back. And if you remain friend, then seven births." So they
preferred, "Oh, I shall become Your enemy, Sir, so that I can come back again after three births." So
why? The K■■■a has all the propensities. Just like we sometimes want to fight, mock fight. So in the
Vaiku■■ha world there cannot be any fight. So because K■■■a wanted to exercise His fighting spirit,
He sent His devotee. He became enemy and He fought.
So you have to understand K■■■a in that way, as H■■■ke■a. He knows that unless Arjuna becomes
affected family-wise, how Bhagavad-g■t■ will be there? Therefore although Gu■■ke■a, Arjuna, is
above darkness, still, by the will of K■■■a, H■■■ke■a, he played just like ordinary man, affected with
his family affection.
Therefore K■■■a in the next verse says . . . uv■ca. K■■■a said: "My dear P■rtha, now you wanted
to see with whom you have to fight. Now here is Bh■■ma, Dro■a and many other kings, all the
descendants of Kuru dynasty, your Dh■tar■■■ra's sons. Now you see very nicely and be prepared to
fight with them." So this is the explanation of H■■■ke■a and Gu■■ke■a.
Thank you very much.
Devotees: All glories to ■r■la Prabhup■da. (cut) (end)
