Pradyumna: O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo
bhagavate v■sudev■ya. (leads chanting of verse) (Prabhup■da and devotees repeat)
(break)
■r■ bhagav■n uv■ca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; a■ocy■n—that which is not worthy
of lamentation; anva■oca■—you are lamenting; tvam—you; prajñ■-v■d■■—learned talks; ca—also;
bh■■ase—speaking; gata—lost; as■n—life; agata—not past; as■n—life; ca—also; na—never;
anu■ocanti—lament; pa■■it■■—the learned.
Translation: "The Blessed Lord said: While speaking learned words, you are mourning for what is not
worthy of grief. Those who are wise lament neither for the living nor the dead."
Prabhup■da: Hmm. So, what is that thing which is living and dead? The body. The body is living and
dead. So K■■■a indirectly, or directly, chastised Arjuna that, "The behavior that you are showing, it is
not like a learned man." N■nu■ocanti pa■■ita■. That means indirectly He said that, "You do not know
things are there. Not learned. You are fool." In spite of Arjuna speaking so many things in support of his
being nonviolent and not to kill his kinsmen, K■■■a chastised him that, "You are not learned. You are
fool."
So this is the position. Those who are under the bodily concept of life, they can speak so many learned
things, but after all, they are fool.
In the ■r■mad-Bh■gavatam, those who are under the bodily concept of life, they are described as
follows: yasya ■tma-buddhi■. ■tma means self. ■tma-buddhi■, "In this body." What is this body?
Ku■ape tri-dh■tuke: it is a bag of three elements, kapha, pitta, v■yu, mucus, bile and air. So . . . or
ordinarily you can understand, this is a combination; this material body is combination of flesh, bone,
blood, mucus, stool, urine, and so many other things. That . . . we are not self, but the foolish persons,
they are taking this lump of matter, bones and flesh, accepting that, "I am this body." No learned man
will take like that. The whole world is misled under this conception. They are accepting this lump of
matter—blood and flesh and bones—"I am. This is I am." This is animal mentality. Animal thinks like
that, no learned man. Learned man, one who knows, he will say aha■ brahm■smi, "I am spirit soul. I
am servant of God." This is learned speaking. "I am not this body."
So K■■■a is chastising Arjuna because he has accepted . . . he's becoming His disciple, so the
spiritual master has the right to chastise the disciple for right direction like the teacher, like the father.
Similarly, although K■■■a and Arjuna are friends, but Arjuna has accepted Him as spiritual master.
There should not be any compromising words as it is done between friend and friend. The right things
must be said that, "You are wrong. Don't talk nonsense, talking like very learned man but you do not
know anything." "Why I do not know?" "Because this body, while living, agat■s■n . . ."
Agat■ as■n means the living force. While the living force is there, and when the living force is gone,
two conditions . . . this body is moving very nicely because the living force is there. And as soon as the
living force is gone out, this nice body will no longer move. It will decompose. "Dust thou art, dust thou
beist." "Again become . . ." It is called pañca-bh■ta. Mix with the earth. Earth, water, fire, air,
sky—these five gross elements are the ingredients of this body. So as soon as the soul is out of this
body, this body again . . . conservation of the energy. The earthly energy goes to the earth, the waterly
energy goes to the water. It is a combination of earth, water, air, fire. So they become decomposed and
become distributed to different elements. And that is the scientific law, it is called conservation of
energy. The energy is never lost. It comes back again to the original stock.
So K■■■a says this body, either in living force or without living force . . . without living force it is called
dead. With living force it is called living. In both the condition, a learned man . . . learned man means
one who knows brahma-bh■ta■, one who knows Brahman, one who has realized Brahman.
Brahma-bh■ta■ prasann■tm■ (BG 18.54). As soon as one is on the stage of brahma-bh■ta■ stage,
he can understand that, "I am not this body. I am separate from this body." This knowledge was very
common knowledge. At least we can see five thousand years ago that the k■atriyas were fighting
severely one another, but still they are not in bodily concept of life.
So Arjuna, being k■atriya, is so much embarrassed with the bodily concept of life; therefore K■■■a
chastised him that, "You are not a very learned man. You are talking just like a learned man, but you
are not learned man." So this conclusion is to be taken by us. That anyone within this world, if he has
got bodily concept of life, he's not a learned man—he's a fool. So this world, at the present moment at
least, it is a fool's paradise. Nobody is learned. Because everyone is working under the bodily concept
of life. This is chastise. This is the first chastisement. Just like before giving lesson, if the student is
writing or reading wrongly, then the teacher immediately says: "You fool, it is not like this. It should be
like this."
So the first step K■■■a took in educating Arjuna . . . the Bhagavad-g■t■ is now being actually spoken,
bhagav■n uv■ca. The first basic principle is explained to Arjuna that, "You do not know anything. Don't
talk just like a learned man." But actually, that is our own . . . every one of us in the same position. Just
like yesterday, two boys came. No philosophy; talking like nonsense, starvation, as if he has taken . . .
what is called? Contract for stopping starvation. So he's starving, everyone is starving, this law . . . the
nature will go on. Somebody . . . because there are three qualities of the nature—sattva-gu■a,
rajo-gu■a, tamo-gu■a. So the natural laws will go on under the three laws. Therefore always we shall
find three classes or three status of living condition. That will be explained in the Bhagavad-g■t■. Even
. . . everywhere there are different species of life. Everywhere these three qualities are working.
Just like there are some good trees. Good trees means which are producing nice fruits and flowers.
They are good trees. And there are trees—no fruit, no flower, very long-standing. No use. No useful
purpose. I've seen in Los Angeles, big, big palm trees, very long, but there is no fruit. In India there are
palm trees like that, they bear fruit, very nice fruit, t■la, very sweet fruit. So any tree which does not
give us nice fruit or nice flower, that is sinful. Amongst the trees also there are pious trees, there are
sinful trees; amongst the animals also there are pious animals, sinful animals. Just like dog and the
cow. Cow is pious animal and the dog is sinful animal. So nature's, amongst the birds, this crow is sinful
bird. And the ducks, white swan, they are pious bird, the peacocks.
So similarly, in the human society also, there are pious men and sinful men. Those who are pious they
have got different position. Janmai■varya-■ruta-■r■ . . . (SB 1.8.26). Pious man means born in very
good family, rich family. Janma, ai■varya. Ai■varya means riches, opulence. Janma, first-class
aristocratic family, br■hma■a family. Janmai■varya-■ruta, educated, highly educated; ■r■, beautiful.
These are the signs of pious life. And similarly, just the opposite—ugly, no education, born in poor
family or low-grade family, poor. These are the things. So either you take human life or animal life or
birds' life, beasts' life, trees' life, anywhere you go, these three laws are working—goodness, passion
and ignorance. Therefore, always there must be three classes—middle class, high class and lower
class. There must be. So you cannot make one classless. That is not possible. So long the bodily
concept of life is there, there must be these three classes: high class, middle class and lower class.
So those who are condemned, they must suffer. Everyone is condemned in this material world. But
first-class condemned, second-class condemned, third-class condemned. So you'll find this first class,
second class, third, you cannot stop it. Just like in Bombay sometimes I showed to my disciples, say in
1935—1935 means about fifty years ago—fifty years ago when I was in Bombay, that time I was doing
some business. So a class of men, they were living on footpath. Their home is on the footpath. They
have got a box or a bag and lying on the footpath and eating on the footpath, their, everything on the
footpath. Now the same class of men are still there.
Now economically, fifty years ago, the value of money was greater. At that time, fifty years ago we were
purchasing, say ghee, utmost one rupee per kilo. So now you cannot get first-class ghee unless you
pay twenty-five rupees per kilo. So the value of money has decreased. So that means, in other words,
people are getting more money. Formerly, one servant was engaged, ten rupees or twelve rupees per
month. Now you cannot get a servant unless you pay one hundred rupees. So in that comparison,
everyone is getting more money, but still the condition is the same. Condition is the same. This will go
on. Even if you get more money, the other circumstances will force you to remain in the same condition
as you were fifty years ago. Because you are destined. This is called destiny. You cannot change your
destiny. That is not possible.
Therefore Bh■gavata says that do not try to change your destiny. Everyone is trying to change the
destiny. "I am poor man. I must be very rich man." But you cannot change your destiny. Tasyaiva heto■
prayateta kovido na labhate yad bhramat■m upary adha■ (SB 1.5.18). In this world we are, every one
of us, are bound up by the laws of karma, destiny. We have got our destiny. So much happiness, so
much distress we must have. Because this is a mixture of happiness and distress. Here you cannot
have unadulterated happiness. That is not possible in this world. Unadulterated happiness, real
happiness can be achieved in the spiritual world, not in the material world. So certain amount of
happiness and certain amount of distress we have to enjoy and suffer. You cannot change it. This is the
law of nature in this material world.
Therefore Bh■gavata says that tasyaiva heto■ prayeteta kovido na labhyate yad bhramat■m upary
adha■. People are wandering within this material world, living entity, in different forms of life under
different conditions of life, but they are not getting the information of K■■■a. That is their misfortune.
So one who is fortunate during this period of continuous wandering in different species of life on
different planets, he contacts another devotee, guru-k■■■a. Or one who is actually anxious to unite
with the Supreme Lord, how one gets this consciousness: by associating with devotees. Just like we
are holding this class. Even those who are not devotee, outsider, if they come they can also
understand, then he becomes . . . one becomes very seriously anxious how to understand God, how to
go back to home, back to Godhead. Then K■■■a immediately helps.
This is the process. K■■■a is there within your heart. As soon as you become little serious,
immediately, K■■■a is ready. K■■■a is ready; He is sitting with you as a friend, simply looking for the
opportunity when you'll come back to Him. That is K■■■a. He's always sitting with you. But we are not
willing to go back to home, back to Godhead. We want to become God in this material world. This is our
position. Instead of going back to home, back to Godhead, live with God, we want to become God here.
That is our position. Therefore we are suffering. Here, you can . . . nowhere, you cannot be God. God is
one. Nobody can be equal or above Him. Everyone must be subordinate to God. Therefore those who
are not learned—foolish people—they are trying to be happy in this material world by adjustment and
becoming himself God. This is atheism and this is demoniac tendency. But those who are advanced in
knowledge, they know that, "We are eternally servant of God; we cannot become God. Better to remain
servant of God. That is our happiness."
So those who are in the bodily concept of life, they cannot advance in this real knowledge, that we are
eternally servant of God; our constitutional position is like that. If we do not serve God, we do not agree
. . . we are servant of God, but if we deny that, "No, I am not servant," so that means I become servant
of m■y■. Servant I'll have to remain. That is my constitutional position. So one must first of all
understand what is his identity. So this is the beginning of a lesson given by K■■■a that, "You are
lamenting for this body. This is not your identity. This is not your identity. You are wrongly thinking."
Just like if your coat is some way or other destroyed, that does not mean that you are destroyed. If your
car by accident is broken, that does not mean that you are finished. Sometimes we get accident, that is
another thing. But I am not the car, I am not this body, I am not this coat. This is real knowledge.
Although sometimes we become little sorry, but the identity is different. So K■■■a says that, "You are
talking like learned man, but you do not know your identity. You are not this body." This is the summary
information, a■ocy■n anva■ocas tva■ prajña-v■d■■■ ca bh■■ase (BG 2.11).
So anyone who is not in perfect knowledge, he should not take the position of talking like a learned
man. That is cheating and that is foolishness. First of all you know things as they are. Then talk.
Otherwise, it is said that it is better not to talk than to talk foolish. It is better to stop talking. Therefore,
sometimes in spiritual advancement there is a process, maunam. Maunam means not to talk. Those
who are too much foolish, the spiritual master orders him, "Don't talk. Please remain silent." That's all.
Because if you talk, you'll talk simply nonsense. Why should you spoil your energy by such nonsense
talking? Better stop. The meditation is also like that also. Instead of talking or doing nonsense, if one is
remaining silent for some time, it is little good for him.
But this meditation and maunam, silence, is not meant for the devotees. They are meant for the lesser
intelligent class of men. Devotees' business is always to talk about K■■■a. Why they should stop
talking, maunam? No. K■rtan■ya■ sad■ hari■ (CC Adi 17.31). Caitanya Mah■prabhu says that one
has to chant and talk of K■■■a twenty-four hours. Where is the question of maunam, silence? There is
no question of silence. Silence is for those who are nonsense. "Be silent. Don't talk." For them. At least
they practice silence means at least they stop talking nonsense.
But those who are actually advanced, for them there is no such restriction. V■c■■si
vaiku■■ha-gu■■nuvar■ane (SB 9.4.18). We should use our talking power for describing the glories of
the Lord. Vaiku■■ha-gu■■nuvar■ane. That is k■rtana. That is chanting. Abhavad vaiy■saki■
k■rtane (Bhakti-ras■m■ta-sindhu 1.2.265). Just like for seven days when Par■k■it Mah■r■ja was
going to die . . . he had only seven days left. So twenty-four hours without any eating or without any
drinking a drop of water, he went on hearing from ■ukadeva Gosv■m■. And similarly, ■ukadeva
Gosv■m■ also went on speaking, speaking ■r■mad-Bh■gavatam. ■r■-vi■■u-■ravane par■k■it.
They got, both of them got salvation back to home, back to Godhead. How? One was hearing, and one
was chanting. These two process. Par■k■it Mah■r■ja was hearing, and ■ukadeva Gosv■m■ was
chanting. And what was the subject matter? K■■■a. That's all.
So K■■■a subject matter is so nice that simply you do not do anything. Simply hear, that's all. You
have got God-given ear. You can hear. Sit down. Sth■ne sthit■■ ■ruti-gat■■ tanu-v■■-manobhi■
(SB 10.14.3). ■rutigatam. ■ruti means this ear. ■rota-panta■. This is called ■rota-panta■: getting
knowledge by hearing. Sat■■ prasa■g■n mama v■rya-samvido bhavanty
h■tk■r■a-ras■yana-kath■■, sat■■ prasa■g■t (SB 3.25.25), when there is actually sat-sanga.
Sat-sanga means this talking of K■■■a, hearing about K■■■a. When there is . . . there is no
business. Not like a rented reciter or a paid reciter, who is earning money by reciting. No, no. Not to
hear from him. Actually he's self-realized who is working for the Lord, from sat■m.
Sat■m means devotees. Sat■■ prasa■ga. Therefore is called satsa■ga. Satsa■ga means the
association of the devotees. Sat means devotee. Sat means God. O■ tat sat. Or everything is asat.
Asat means temporary. This material world is temporary. And sat means spiritual. So sat-sa■ga means
spiritual association. Sat-sa■g■n mukta-du■-sa■ga■. The more you associate with sat, with
devotees, then you become . . . more you become liberated. Sat-sa■g■n mukta-du■-sa■ga■.
Du■-sa■ga. We are in the material world, we are simply in association, bad association, du■-sa■ga.
So if we want to get rid of this bad association, we must associate with the devotees. Sat-sangat mukta
duhsanga. And sat■■ prasa■g■t mama v■rya-samvido, if we hear in really devotees' association,
then the . . .
(break) So Arjuna has got the best opportunity. He's hearing from the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. He has got the . . . he's so fortunate. He's talking with the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
face to face, directly. So our business should be we should follow the footsteps of Arjuna. How to follow
the footsteps of Arjuna? As Arjuna understood Bhagavad-g■t■, you try to understand in that way.
Arjuna accepted K■■■a the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Para■ brahma para■ dh■ma pavitra■
parama■ bhav■n (BG 10.12): "K■■■a, You are the Supreme Person, Para■ Brahman, pavitra, the
most pure." So if we, similarly, if we, even if we do not understand Bhagavad-g■t■, if we follow that,
"Arjuna has understood like this, that K■■■a is the Supreme Brahman, Supreme Personality of
Godhead," then you understand everything. This is called parampar■. You don't require to, I mean, to
tax your brain, what is K■■■a. Because now we have got poor intelligence. We cannot do that. But
you simply accept what Arjuna says. Then you are perfect. Even I make a . . . I may become a fool
number one, but if I accept . . . mah■jano yena gata■ sa panth■h (CC Madhya 17.186). Mah■jana,
those who are authorities, if you follow the authorities, then you understand.
dharmasya tattva■ nihita■ guh■yam. It is very difficult to understand what is religion, what is the
process of religion. People are very much puzzled. But if we follow the great personalities . . . they are
also mentioned in the ■■stras: Svayambhu, ■ambhu, Kum■ra, Kapila, Manu. So if we follow their
footsteps . . . just like Arjuna. That, that is, really we understand. "If Arjuna has understood like this, so
let me understand like that." That's all. Simple thing. Then we understand Bhagavad-g■t■. But if we
want to speak very learned, scholarly, but do not understand what is K■■■a, this is simply waste of
time, as the so-called scholars and philosophers are doing.
They do not understand what is K■■■a, but talking all nonsense, and such things are very much
appreciated by others. That is described in the ■r■mad-Bh■gavatam, ■va-vi■-var■ha-u■■ra-kharai■
sa■stuta■ puru■a■ pa■u■ (SB 2.3.19). These rascals, so-called scholars, so-called incarnation, are
accepted by similar class of animals, ■va-vi■-var■ha. And actually Vedic understanding is to follow the
footsteps of the predecessor ■c■ryas, who understand things. Then our life will be successful. We'll
understand.
Thank you very much.
Devotees: Harib . . . (cut) (end)
