Pradyumna: O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo
bhagavate v■sudev■ya. (leads chanting of verse) (Prabhup■da and devotees repeat)
(break)
adharma—irreligion; abhibhav■t—having been predominant; k■■■a—O K■■■a;
pradu■yanti—become polluted; kula-striya■—family ladies; str■■u—of the womanhood;
du■■■su—being so polluted; v■r■■eya—O descendant of V■■■i; j■yate—it so becomes;
var■a-sa■kara■—unwanted progeny.
Translation: "When irreligion is prominent in the family, O K■■■a, the women of the family become
corrupt, and from the degradation of womanhood, O descendant of V■■■i, comes unwanted progeny."
Prabhup■da: This is very important point for good population. Without good population in the society,
gentlemen, cultured, educated, following the rules and regulation of religious principle, how you can
expect peace and prosperity? That is not possible. So the whole Vedic system was meant for having
very good population. Not such kind of population who are addicted to killing and drinking and so many
other sinful activities. No. Then you cannot check.
If such population is there, then everything will be polluted. Especially nowadays, because there is want
of good population, and they go in the government, and how you can expect good government, good
administration? The whole population is polluted. Therefore even such a great state, USA, the
president is being tried and he's being criticized.
So there must be good population. So to have good population, the women should be very chaste. That
is the basic principle of Vedic civilization. And to keep the women chaste, it was the function of the
responsible father, or, in the absence of father, the elder brother, so he must get the woman, the girl,
married. It is compulsory. There was no compulsory for man to marry, because a man may remain
brahmac■r■. By training, he can abstain from sex. But if woman is not protected very strictly, it is very
difficult. It is very difficult.
C■■akya Pa■■ita has . . . (chuckles) It is not . . . it is . . . we are discussing ■■stra. Don't think
otherwise. (chuckles) C■■akya Pa■■ita says, vi■v■sa■ naiva kartavya■ str■■u r■ja-kule■u ca.
Vi■v■sa■ naiva kartavyam: "Don't trust women." Vi■v■sa■ naiva kartavya■ str■■u. Str■■u means
women. R■ja-kula . . . and politicians. Yes. Vi■v■sa■ naiva kartavya■ str■■u r■ja-kule■u ca. Never
the trust the politician and woman.
Of course, when woman comes to K■■■a consciousness, that position is different. We are speaking of
ordinary woman. Because K■■■a says, in another place, striyo vai■yas tath■ ■■dra■ (BG 9.32).
They are considered, women, vai■ya, the mercantile community, and ■■dra, and the worker class,
they are less intelligent. P■pa-yoni. When the progeny is defective, then they become less intelligent.
So K■■■a says:
Even p■pa-yoni, degraded birth, even women, ■■dra and vai■ya, they also can become fully K■■■a
conscious by training. And they can also go back to home, back to Godhead, without any check.
So when we study things from material point of view, these things are to be taken care. But when a
man or woman becomes K■■■a conscious, he or she takes care of herself or himself. So it is spoken .
. . Arjuna is speaking of ordinary woman. Str■■u du■■■su. Just like adharma-abhibhava. Adharma. If
the woman is trained, a girl is trained from the very beginning, that, "You should remain chaste," that is
dharma. It is called sat■t■ dharma. Sat■ means chastity. There are many stories of Sat■, chaste
woman. Nala-damayant■. His (her) husband became so poverty-stricken. He was king, but he became
later on so poverty-stricken that he had no sufficient cloth. The husband and wife was putting on the
same cloth, half and half. So still, still there was no divorce. You see? Still the woman did not consider .
. . she was also king's daughter. But the husband has fallen down to so much poverty-stricken
condition, "So why shall I live with him?" These are some of the extreme examples of chastity.
Not to speak of olden days. I have seen in Bombay, in 1935 or '34, on the roadside, there was a
beggar. The beggar, the face was defaced. Might be some accident. His eyes and everything became
defaced. He could not see; everything became useless. So he, he was sitting on the roadside, and his
wife also, also sitting. But I saw that beggar was neat and clean. The wife was also neat and clean. The
wife's business was that to keep the husband always neat and clean and fresh, and bring him there and
again take him at home. Young woman. So I could understand that the wife is so chaste. She has not
left such ugly husband, because his face was defaced. And helping him, because they require some
money. So we have seen.
There are many stories of chaste woman. Many stories. There was one disciple of R■m■nuj■c■rya, a
very poor. So R■m■nuj■c■rya came in that poor disciple's house and he saw there was no one in the
house. So he thought, "What is this? This is my disciple's house. He's family man. Why there is none?"
That means he could understand that the door is not locked. Door was closed only.
Then he could understand that within the door his wife is there. Therefore he knocked the door, and
there was response also, knocking, but she could not come out. That means she . . . she was so poor
that she had no garment. She was keeping herself within the room, naked. So R■m■nuj■c■rya could
understand that, "There is his wife. Maybe she has no sufficient clothing." So immediately, his own
cloth he gave her, within the room, and the woman came out, putting on that, and then offered
obeisances. So he could understand the position, that very, very poor. Even no clothing.
So after putting on the cloth, he (she) went to the grocer's shop. Because R■m■nuj■c■rya is there,
she must receive. Grocer shop. The grocer knew that this woman is very woman, uh, very poor, so his
business was to entice her. But she never agreed, although she was young. Now this woman went to
the grocer's shop that, "You know that I am very poor. I require immediately some grains, ghee and
other things.
My Guru Mah■r■ja has come at home. I must receive. So tonight I agree with your proposal. Please
give me. Even at the sacrifice of my chastity I want this." So the grocer was very glad: "Oh, this woman,
I have canvassed her, have tried to induce her. She never agreed. And now she's agreeing." So, "All
right, you take, whatever you like. Take." So she was given all kinds of food grains, as much as she
wanted. And she cooked and gave to the spiritual master and his associates, his servants. Everything
was very nice.
In the meantime, the husband came, working whole day, and he saw that everything was nicely done.
"Guru Mah■r■ja is fed, and his associates, they're fed." So he asked his wife, "How did you get all
these things?" Then she narrated the whole story. Then husband also said: "Yes, you have promised.
All right. Take some pras■dam and go to him. Because you have promised to meet him this evening.
So go." Then the grocer heard the whole story, and his mind became changed: "Oh, such a chaste
woman. Such a faithful . . . she . . . you are my mother. You take more ingredients, grains. As much as
you like, you shall . . ."
So there are still. That is not very long ago. So this was the training. And the psychology is that woman,
the first man she meets, and if she is kept carefully, she becomes staunch lover. This is psychology.
There is good psychology in maintaining the society. Therefore a woman, especially in India, especially
in Bengal, before attaining puberty, she was married. Not to meet the husband unless she attains
puberty. But she remained at father's house, but she must know that, "I am married. I have got
husband." This psychology. Then she becomes very chaste, because she thinks of her husband and
becomes more and more devoted. So this arrangement that woman must be married before puberty . .
. or even after puberty, she must get a husband.
So if this dharma . . . it is called kany■-d■ya. Kany■-d■ya. Kany■-d■ya means it is very obligatory
that the father must get the daughter married. This is dharma. So if this dharma, or this religious
principle, is violated, that is . . . Arjuna is marking: adharma-abhi, abhi-bhava. When people become
neglectful of the family tradition and religious principles, adharma abhibhav■t k■■■a pradu■yanti
kula-striya■ . . . (BG 1.40). Kula-striya■. Kula-striya■ means . . . kula means family, and striya■ means
woman. So woman must be belonging to a respectable family. Therefore it is said kula-striya■. Not
society girl. Kula-striya■: of the family. We have got experience in our school, college days. I was
sitting in a friend's house, and one sweeper woman, sweeper, with broomstick and with, what is called,
covering?
Devotee: Shawl.
Prabhup■da: She was standing, say, about twenty yards' distant from our sitting place. So I asked my
friend that, "Your this sweeper woman wants to come in. She's waiting because we are sitting. She is
ashamed to come. So let us come." So we stood separately. That means although she was a sweeper
woman, still we had to honor her to enter. We stood up separately. She was feeling that, "How can I go
between two men?" This we have seen in our . . .
So this is Vedic culture. Woman should not be allowed to mix with man. Not allowed. In Japan also, the
same system. Before marriage, they can mix, but after marriage they cannot mix. In Japan also I have
seen. But in India still the system is there. Woman, without husband, cannot talk with any man. That is
also psychological. In the Bh■gavata it is stated that man is like ghee, butter pot, and woman is like
fire. Therefore, as they . . . as soon as there is fire and butter pot, the butter pot must melt. Therefore
they should be kept aside. These are the statements. And the ■■stra says that in a solitary place you
should not remain even with your daughter, even with your sister, even with your mother.
Either your mother or sister or daughter. No . . . nobody becomes lusty with mother or sister or
daughter. But ■■stra says: "Even your mother or sister or daughter, you should not live in a solitary
place." Then one may question that, "How it is possible?" No. The ■■stra says, balav■n
indriya-gr■ma■: the senses are so strong that it becomes polluted. "Now it may be, some rascal fools
may be polluted like that." No. ■■stra . . . vidv■■s api kar■ati. Even the most learned, he can be
polluted.
So sometimes in India I am criticized that I keep women and men in the same temple. In India, that is
not allowed. No women can live at night. They can come and go. But I defend myself that this is the
system of the country, the women and men, they intermingle. How can I check it? Then the women,
shall I not give them any chance for chanting Hare K■■■a? No. I shall do this chance. I shall give this
chance to woman even at the risk. That is my reply.
So therefore chastity is very, very important thing for producing good population, nice population. So
unless the population is good . . . if the population become hippies, then how there can be any peace
and prosperity? Therefore, to produce children, there is sa■sk■ra. First sa■sk■ra is garbh■dh■na
sa■sk■ra. This is called kula-dharma. Garbh■dh■na sa■sk■ra means when, especially the high
caste, br■hma■a, k■atriya especially . . . ■■dra . . .
Not ■■dra. ■■dra has no sa■sk■ra. Only the higher class: br■hma■a, k■atriya and vai■ya. Vai■ya
also sometimes no sa■sk■ra. But br■hma■a, k■atriya must have sa■sk■ra. Da■a-vidh■
sa■sk■r■■, ten kinds of sa■sk■ra. One of the sa■sk■ra . . . sa■sk■ra means purificatory method.
One of the sa■sk■ra is also marriage. One must get married. So, before the child is given birth, there
is a sa■sk■ra. What is called? Garbh■dh■na sa■sk■ra. It is not that the husband and wife mix
without any restriction and have sex life at any time. No.
You know that, that mother of Hira■yaka■ipu, Ka■yapa Muni, I think, father. So she, the woman
became very much sexually excited, and the husband replied that, "This is not time. This is very bad
time, evening. Why you are insisting?" But she was too much lusty, and because the husband was
obliged, Hira■yaka■ipu was born, a demon was born. Therefore there is garbh■dh■na sa■sk■ra, to
find out when the husband and wife should mix and give birth to a child. Therefore in the
Bhagavad-g■t■ you'll see that "Sex life which is according to the principle of religious ideas, that is I
am." Sex life is not bad, provided it is executed according to the religious principles.
So garbh■dh■na sa■sk■ra . . . just, what is the idea? The idea is the child born must be first class.
He'll be able to become K■■■a conscious. He'll be able to understand the ■■stras, the Vedas. He
must have the good brain. These were the ideas. But if they are not born in that way, like cats and dog,
that is called var■a-sa■kara. Var■a-sa■kara. You cannot specify whether he's a br■hma■a or a
k■atriya or a vai■ya and ■■dra. That is called var■a-sa■kara. So var■a-sa■kara population is not
good. Var■a-sa■kara. No caste, no designation, no definition to which class this man belongs.
So at the present moment, because these purificatory processes are not accepted, even in India . . .
accepted, they're unable. Everything has topsy-turvied. Therefore the ■■stra says that, "Accept
everyone as ■■dra." Kalau ■■dra■ sambhava. There is no more br■hma■a, k■atriya, vai■ya. All
■■dras. We have to accept. Because no Vedic culture, no garbh■dh■na sa■sk■ra. They are born like
cats and dogs. So where is this division? There cannot be. Therefore, accept them as ■■dra.
Var■a-sa■kara is less than ■■dra. So at least ■■dra they should be. So there is no Vaidic d■k■■.
For ■■dra, there is no d■k■■, there is no initiation. Initiation is meant for the persons who are born in
br■hma■a family, k■atriya family or vai■ya family. The ■■dra has no initiation. So in India there are
professional gurus. They initiate ■■dras, but do not eat foodstuff touched by the disciple. So there are
so many things, that if he's initiated, how he can remain ■■dra? But they keep him ■■dra; at the same
time, they become guru.
San■tana Gosv■m■ gives direction in the Hari-bhakti-vil■sa that tath■ d■k■■-vidh■nena dvijatva■
j■yate n■■■m. If properly initiated, he becomes immediately br■hma■a. Dvijatvam. Dvija means
second birth. Yath■ k■ñcanat■■ y■ti k■■sya■ rasa-vidh■nata■ (Hari-bhakti-vil■sa 2.12). There is a
chemical process that k■■sya, bell metal, can be turned into gold by mixing with proportionately
mercury. Now here is a hint of chemistry. If anyone can prepare gold . . . but it is very difficult to mix
mercury. As soon as there is little heat, immediately the mercury's finished.
So there is a process. Everything has process. Many yog■s know how to make gold from copper.
Actually, chemically, copper, tin and mercury, if you mix proportionately, it will be gold. So San■tana
Gosv■m■ gives this example: As the copper and tin, these two metals, mixed with mercury, there can
be production of gold, similarly, by proper initiation, by the proper spiritual master, one ■■dra, even
though he's a ■■dra, less than ■■dra, var■a-sa■kara or ca■■■la, he can become dvija, br■hma■a.
So our process is to make dvija. P■ñcar■trik■ vidhi. P■ñcar■trik■ vidhi. That is recommended.
R■pa Gosv■m■ gives this direction, that the initiation must be done according to ■ruti, sm■ti or
p■ñcar■trik■ vidhi. There is ny■ya-prasth■na, ■ruti-prasth■na and sm■ti-prasth■na: to make
spiritual progress in three ways: by the Ved■nta philosophy, or Vedic ways, or according to sm■ti.
Sm■ti means authorized books written in accordance to the ■ruti. ■ruti sm■ti. Just like
Bhagavad-g■t■. Bhagavad-g■t■ is not directly Vedas, but the all the stanzas of Bhagavad-g■t■,
they're strictly according to the ny■ya-prasth■na and ■ruti-prasth■na. So any book which is strictly
written according to the Vedas and Ved■ntas, that is also accepted as Vedic literature.
So p■ñcar■trik■ vidhi means that it doesn't matter whether man is ■■dra or ca■■■la. Ca■■■la
means less than ■■dra. Pañcama, the fifth grade. First class, br■hma■a; second class, k■atriya; third
class, vai■ya; fourth class, ■■dra; and below this fourth class, they're all ca■■■las. Ca■■■las
means pañcama, untouchable. They are called untouchable. So even the untouchables . . . because
K■■■a has said, m■■ hi p■rtha vyap■■ritya ye 'pi syu■ p■pa-yonaya■ (BG 9.32). The
p■pa-yoni—ca■■■la means p■pa-yoni, born of low-grade family . . .
The Bh■gavata says, ■ukadeva Gosv■m■ says, that kir■ta-h■n■ndhra-pulinda-pulka■■
■bh■ra-■umbh■ yavan■ khas■daya■ (SB 2.4.18). Yavana, mlecca yavana, they, they are called . . .
they are also counted amongst the ca■■■las. Ye 'nye ca p■p■■: even lower than that. Ye 'nye ca
p■p■■ ■uddhyanti. They become purified. How? Prabhavi■■ave nama■: when they are initiated to
become K■■■a conscious. So if a . . . one may argue, "How it is possible to make a ca■■■la a
Vai■■ava?" No. That is possible. Prabhavi■■ave nama■. Vi■■u is so powerful, omnipotent, He can
do that. So only by Vi■■u mantra, by becoming a Vai■■ava, one can transcend all these restrictions,
sociology. They can be saved.
That is confirmed by K■■■a: m■■ c■vyabhic■ri■■ bhakti-yogena ya■ sevate sa gu■■n
brahm■t■tyaitan brahma-bh■yaya kalpate (BG 14.26). Immediately he transcends. He's in the
Brahman platform. One who has taken very seriously this devotional service, he's no more on this
material platform. So long we are in the material platform, these distinction, br■hma■a, ksatriya,
vai■ya, var■a-sa■kara, they are considered. But when one is transcendentally situated, simply in
pure, unalloyed service of the Lord, he's no more in the material platform; he's in the spiritual platform.
Brahma-bh■y■ya kalpate. He's already in the Brahman platform. Brahman platform means sa gu■■n
samat■tya et■n.
This material platform means three modes of material nature: sattva-gu■a, rajo-gu■a, tamo-gu■a.
Here, even one is br■hma■a—sattva-gu■a means the brahminical qualification— he's also
contaminated. He's also contaminated. He's conditioned by the material nature. And what to speak of
■■dra and var■a-sa■kara? Everyone is conditioned by the material nature. Daiv■ hy e■■ gu■amay■
(BG 7.14). Br■hma■a means to be situated a first-class prisoner. A first-class prisoner is also prisoner.
You cannot say that he's free. No, free is different from a first-class prisoner. Sometimes, any
respectable gentleman, some political offense, he's put into jail. Just like Gandhi also went to jail, and
so many others. But they were given the place, first-class prisoners. They got servant. They got
separate bungalow and books, library, all facilities, but they cannot go out of the prison house. They are
called first-class prisoners. So to become a br■hma■a means to becomes a first-class prisoner. That's
all.
So our . . . our point of view is not to become a first-class prisoner. To get out of the prison. That is
Vai■■ava vision. You'll find . . . last night I have given comments that M■dhavendra Pur■, he was
performing the Annak■■a ceremony and installing the Deity. So everything was being br■hma■a . . .
done by br■hma■a, qualified br■hma■a, but M■dhavendra Pur■ initiated them again to become
Vai■■ava. Then he gave them in charge of the Deity worship. So the Vai■■ava functions cannot be
done even by a br■hma■a. Even one is qualified br■hma■a, he is unfit to propagate Vai■■ava
philosophy. That is stated in the ■■stras.
■va-paco means ca■■■la, who was eating dog. That is considered the lowest. There are different
kinds of meat-eaters, but in India, the cow-flesh eaters, they were none. Some of them were eating
hogs, even dogs. But there was no . . . no. Government will not allow to eat the cow flesh. No, that is
not allowed. If you want to eat flesh, you can eat hogs and dogs, and other, goats also. But you cannot
touch a cow. This is restriction. First of all, they should not be meat-eater. But if you are staunch
meat-eaters, then you cannot touch cow. You can eat some other animal. So ■va-paca■. ■va-paca■
means the dog-eaters. In Korea, and some parts of there, they eat dogs. They, they sell dog flesh
publicly. So in India also there is a class. In Assam side, they eat also dog.
So the dog-eaters, they are considered lowest of the mankind. Their name is ■va-paca■. ■va means
dog, and paca■ means who cooks. ■va-paca■ means ca■■■la. If a man from the ■va-paca■ family
or the ca■■■la family, he becomes a Vai■■ava, strictly according to the orders, then he can become
guru, but not a br■hma■a if he's not a Vai■■ava. This is the stricture. Even one is born in the family of
a br■hma■a, and he's not only born, he's qualified, sat-karma-nipu■o . . . nipu■o means qualified.
Br■hma■a has got six kinds of occupation. He must be learned himself, he must be able to teach
others Vedic literatures. That is called pa■hana p■■hana. Then he must worship . . . worship means
demigods. Or they consider that any demigod or God, the same, some impersonalists. So yajana,
y■jana. There are other also, religious ritual functions. They perform. That is called yajana. Yajana
y■jana. And d■na pratig■ha. A br■hma■a takes contribution. A br■hma■a is never engaged in
service like ■■dra. That is ■■dra's business.
So these are called dharmas. There are so many departmental dharmas. So Arjuna is referring to
these, that adharma-abhibhav■t k■■■a. When these principles are sacrificed and there is awakening
of adharma, irreligious principles, then the result will be . . . adharma abhibhav■t k■■■a pradu■yanti
kula-striya■ (BG 1.40). Then the stricture will be withdrawn, and the family women, women, they'll be
polluted. And as soon as the women is polluted, str■■u du■■■su, the woman is polluted, v■r■■eya,
"My dear K■■■a," j■yate var■a-sa■kara, "Then the whole population will be var■a-sa■kara." And the
next verse will explain how var■a sankara population makes this world exactly like hell. That is stated.
This will be explained next.
So five thousand years, you just try to understand how the society was going on strictly on the Vedic
principles. So now there is no such thing. Nobody is observing Vedic principles. And because the Vedic
principles were strictly being followed, the whole world was one unit, controlled by these P■■■avas.
Even the grandson of P■■■ava, Mah■r■ja Par■k■it . . . this is on the Battlefield of Kuruk■etra. Then
when the battle was over, the next king was Mah■r■ja Par■k■it, grandson of Arjuna. Up to that time,
everything was in order, Vedic principle. All over the world. There was no question of eating meat. The
same principles were followed—no meat-eating, no illicit sex, no gambling, no intoxication. Because the
king was very strong.
Mah■r■ja Par■k■it, when he saw that a black man was going to kill one cow, immediately he took his
sword: "Who are you? I shall kill you immediately." That was king's stricture. So the Kali was ordered to
get out of his kingdom. He begged of his life, "Sir, you are going to kill me. But it is my time. I have now
come, and it is my business, cow-killing. So what can I do? This is my business." So Mah■r■ja
Par■k■it understood that now the Kali-yuga is coming. So it is his business. So "I am as king. How can
I stop his business?"
That is also another problem. One must be occupied, one must be engaged in his business. Therefore,
he asked him to go to these places. Where? In the slaughterhouse, in the brothel for illicit sex, and
slaughterhouse, and in the drunkard den for intoxication, and gambling place. So Kali was in difficulty to
find out a place like that in that time. He could not find. Therefore there was conspiracy to kill the king
so that Kali can enter.
So these are the principles. This is called human society. Varn■■ram■caravat■ puru■e■a para■
pum■n (CC Madhya 8.58). In human society, vi■■ur ■r■dhyate, the Lord is worshiped. But ne te
vidu■ sv■rtha-gati■ hi vi■■u■. At the present moment, these rascals, they do not know. Andh■
yath■ndair upan■yam■n■■. And the so-called leaders, they are blind themselves, and they are trying
to lead other blind men. This is the social position. Therefore there is no more hope of reviving the
Vedic culture. But by the grace of Caitanya Mah■prabhu, ceto darpana m■rjanam . . . (CC Antya
20.12) The Vedic culture means to cleanse the heart and make him perfect. Brahma-bh■ta■, perfectly
spiritualized. That is Vedic culture. Vedai■ ca sarvair aham eva vedya■ (BG 15.15). To know the
Supreme Lord, that is Vedic culture. Now everything is topsy-turvied.
Therefore, by the grace of Caitanya Mah■prabhu, He has simply recommended, harer n■ma harer
n■ma harer n■ma eva kevalam (CC Adi 17.21). Only chant. Then the result will be
ceto-darpana-m■rjanam (CC Antya 20.12). The same result as the Vedic culture introduced will purify
the heart to understand one's position. By the chanting of Hare K■■■a mantra, the same position will
come. It is so nice. K■rtan■d eva k■■■asya mukta-sa■ga■ para■ vrajet (SB 12.3.51).
Therefore there is no question of being depressed that, "We do not belong to this, do not belong to
that." Never mind. Whatever it is. Simply chant, and you'll become purified. That is K■■■a
consciousness movement.
Thank you very much.
Devotees: Haribol. (end)
