Pradyumna: O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo
bhagavate v■sudev■ya. (leads chanting of verse) (Prabhup■da and devotees repeat)
(break)
na—nor; ca—also; ■reya■—good; anupa■y■mi—do I foresee; hatv■—by killing; svajanam—own
kinsmen; ■have—in the fight; na—nor; k■nk■e—do I desire; vijayam—victory; k■■■a—O K■■■a;
na—nor; ca—also; r■jyam—kingdom; sukh■ni—happiness thereof; ca—also.
Translation: "I do not see how any good can come from killing my own kinsmen in this battle, nor can I,
my dear K■■■a, desire any subsequent victory, kingdom or happiness."
Prabhup■da: So there are two things: ■reya and preya. Here Arjuna is speaking of ■reya. ■reya
means ultimate good, and preya means immediately palatable. That is called preya. So everyone
should be interested for ■reya, not for preya. Just like a child: he likes to play all day and night,
naturally. Playful child. So that is called preya. He likes immediate pleasure. But his father says: "My
dear child, just go to school or read book."
So father is asking for ■reya, ultimate good. If he is not educated at the, at childhood, then how he will
prosper in his future life? So considering the future prospect, ultimate good, that is called ■reya. And
preya means immediate. Just like we eat something which I may not digest, or it may have some bad
effect later on. But people are interested the immediate benefit, without calculation of future benefit.
So Arjuna is considering with reference to his future that, "If I kill my kinsmen, what benefit there will
be? I want victory, I want kingdom, to become happy, but if my all kinsmens are killed, then what is the
value of my victory? With whom I shall enjoy?" He is thinking like that. Society . . . the same thing:
society, friendship and love. Everyone wants to enjoy life with society, friends. Nobody wants to enjoy
life alone. That is not possible. This is not natural.
So where from we got this idea that I cannot enjoy alone? Just like generally a person is alone, but he
gets a wife with a hope for enjoying family life—children, wife, friends. G■ha-k■etra, ata■
g■ha-k■etra-sut■pta-vittai■. G■ha means apartment, and k■etra means land. G■ha-k■etra-suta.
Suta means children. Ata■ g■ha-k■etra-suta ■pta. ■pta means friends, society. Ata■
g■ha-k■etra-sut■pta-vittai■. ■pta means friends, society, and to support all these things—g■ha,
k■etra, suta, ■pta—there is required money, vitta. Vitta means money. Ata■
g■ha-k■etra-sut■pta-vittair janasya moho 'yam aha■ mameti (SB 5.5.8). This is material life. G■ha,
k■etra. "I must have g■ha." G■ha means with wife. Na g■ha■ g■ham ity uktam, g■hi■■ g■ham ity
■hu■. G■ha. G■ha means house.
So we are also living in house, very nice house. But still, we are not g■hastha. A g■ha, to live in a
house, does not mean a g■hastha. Na g■ha■ g■ham ity ■hu■. G■hastha means g■ha. G■he
ti■■hati iti g■hastha. Every Sanskrit word has got elaborate meaning. G■hastha means one who
stays in g■ha, in house. He is called g■hastha. So we can be called g■hastha also. We are living in
house. No. ■■stra says, na g■ha■ g■ham ity ■hu■: "Simply a house is not g■ha." There must be the
housewife. That means wife. G■hi■■ g■ham ity ■hu■. In Hindi this word is used, ghar-w■li, means if
there is no wife, that is not g■hastha. And another, C■■akya Pa■■ita says, putra-h■na■ g■ha■
■■nyam: "You have got wife, but if you have no children, that g■ha is also void."
So g■hastha means to live with wife and children, and cultivating spiritual life. That is called g■hastha.
It doesn't matter, you live with your wife and children, or you live with brahmac■r■, sanny■s■.
Anything. It doesn't matter. Therefore there are so many divisions of life. Whichever status of life is
suitable for you, you can accept—brahmac■r■, g■hastha, v■naprastha, sanny■sa ■■rama. ■■rama.
When the word is added, ■■rama, that means it has got reference with cultivation of spiritual life. So
g■hastha-■■rama. One can live at home with wife and children, but the business should be K■■■a
consciousness.
We don't accept the M■y■v■d■ sanny■s■, because there is no K■■■a consciousness. Simply by
becoming sanny■s■ . . . brahma satya■ jagan mithy■: "This world is false. Brahman is truth. So I give
up this world." That kind of sanny■s■ we do not accept. Either you become g■hastha or sanny■s■ or
brahmac■r■, there must be K■■■a. Then it will be called ■■rama. G■hastha-■■rama,
sanny■sa-■■rama, brahmac■r■-■■rama. Therefore this word is added, ■■rama.
So Arjuna is in g■hastha-■■rama. He wants to serve K■■■a. He's K■■■a's friend. He is a devotee.
K■■■a has already recommended. In the Fourth Chapter He will declare, bhakto 'si priyo 'si me (BG
4.3): "You are My dear friend. You are My devotee." So he is qualified, g■hastha-■■ram■. He is
devotee of K■■■a, but he is also family man. He has his wife, children.
So here the problem is what is ■reya? What is ultimate good? That is mistaken here. Therefore
Bhagavad-g■t■ is required. He is thinking that "K■■■a is not so important. My family is important. My
family." Although he is devotee. Therefore kani■■ha-adhik■r■, in the lower stage of devotion. In the
lower stage of devotion, one may be interested in K■■■a consciousness, but his real interest is how to
improve this material life. Just like "O God, give us our daily bread." So he has gone to God not to serve
God, but to take bread. ■rta■ arth■rth■ (BG 7.16). That is also good. But he . . . because he has gone
to God to ask for bread, he is better than the rascals who do not care for God. He has gone to God.
That is recommended in the Bhagavad-g■t■. ■rto arth■rth■ jijñ■sur jñ■n■ ca bharatar■abha.
Catur-vidh■ bhajante m■■ suk■tino 'rjuna (BG 7.16). "Arjuna, four kinds of people, they become
devotee." Who are they? ■rta. ■rta means distressed. Arth■rth■, one who is poor, wants some
money; jijñ■su, inquisitive; and jñ■n■, and man of knowledge. So ■rta■ arth■rth■, this is meant, this
is referred to the g■hastha. The g■hastha, they become sometimes distressed. The
g■hastha-■■rama means unless there is K■■■a or full consciousness of K■■■a, it is simply
miserable. Simply miserable. Du■kh■layam a■■■vatam (BG 8.15). Simply working hard day and
night, then there is . . . child is sick, then wife is not satisfied, the servant is not satisfied . . . so many
things, problem. But if there is K■■■a in the center, the all problems will be solved.
But people do not know this. They think that, "I shall be happy with wife, children, servants, house, and
this and that." No. That is not possible. Therefore one should be in g■hastha-■■rama, not only in
family life. Family, the dogs have got family life. He has got wife, children. The cats and the hogs, a big
family. Because a hog begets, at a time, one dozen children. What you beget? You are afraid of
begetting one child even, this contraceptive method. But they are not afraid. They beget one dozen
children at a time, twice in a year. So to live with family, wife, children . . . then the hog accepts family
life. No. That is not family life. You live with wife, children, peacefully, if you like, but bring in K■■■a in
the center. That is g■hastha-■■rama.
So Arjuna is talking of the ultimate good. But he is talking ultimate good with the point of view from
material conception. He does not know . . . he knows, but he is playing the part of a person who does
not know that ultimate ■reya, ultimate good, is K■■■a. Ultimate good is not that, "We live with
family—that is good." No. When you live with family because you cannot renounce, so that is allowed.
But you live with family with K■■■a.
So K■■■a is there, but he is thinking in terms of material role that, "If my kinsmen are dead, I kill them,
then where is my good? It is no good. What shall I do with the victory and happiness? Where is
happiness? I cannot live without them." This is the conception. Ata■ g■ha . . . ata■
g■ha-k■etra-sut■pta-vittair janasya moho 'yam (SB 5.5.8). This is illusion. Everyone is trying to
become happy with society, friendship and love—children, wife, friends, money and house and land.
This is the conception of material . . .
So Arjuna is thinking in material concept of life. He is not thinking that, "My ultimate good is to satisfy
K■■■a." This is the Bhagavad-g■t■'s purport. That is K■■■a consciousness. One has to change to
satisfy K■■■a, not to satisfy himself or the family or the society or the nation. No. Whether K■■■a is
satisfied, that is the criterion. That is ultimate goal. Tasmin tu■■e jagat tu■■am. If K■■■a is satisfied,
then other things will be automatically satisfied. But they do not know. They are thinking that, "I can
bring K■■■a in the midst of my family, provided K■■■a helps me to enjoy this material life." They are
thinking like that. That is ■rta. But that is also good.
Just like Dhruva Mah■r■ja, he was ■rta. ■rta, means he wanted something material, benefit. His
stepmother insulted him that, "You cannot sit down on the lap of your father because you were not born
in my womb." He was k■atriya; he took it insult. So his father had two wives. So he was born the eldest
queen. The father was not very much attached to the eldest queen, the father was attached to the
junior queen. And the junior queen was very proud that "The king is in my hand." So she insulted.
The father was not happy. The . . . although Dhruva Mah■r■ja was born of the eldest queen . . . and it
is sometimes liking. So that does not mean he did not like his son. So he wanted to sit down on the lap
of his father and the stepmother insulted. So he took it very seriously. And he wanted to have the
kingdom. This is arth■rth■. He wanted something. And his mother advised that, "You take shelter of
K■■■a. He can fulfill your desire." So therefore ■rta■ arth■rth■. He was distressed; at the same time,
he wanted a kingdom by the grace of K■■■a. That was his purpose. So because he went to worship
K■■■a for some material benefit, he is to be taken as pious.
Catur-vidh■ bhajante m■■ suk■tina (BG 7.16). Suk■tina means pious. K■t■ means very expert in
acting worldly activities. So one who are engaged in pious activities, they are called suk■tina. There
are two kinds of activities: impious activities, sinful activities; and pious activities. So one who goes to
pray in the church or in the temple, "O God, give us our daily bread" or "God, give me some money" or
"God, give me relief from this distress," they are also pious. They are not impious. The impious people,
they will never surrender to God, K■■■a. Na m■■ du■k■tino m■■h■■, prapadyante nar■dham■■
(BG 7.15). These class of men, sinful men, rascal, lowest of the mankind, whose knowledge has been
taken away by m■y■, and demon—these classes of men will never surrender to God. Therefore they
are du■k■tina, impious.
So K■■■a is pious, but still he wants the family benefit. This is his defect. Er, Arjuna. Family
prosperity. He wants to be happy with society, friendship and love. Therefore he says that na k■■k■e
vijayam . . . this is called vair■gya. ■ma■■na-vair■gya. It is called ■ma■■na-vair■gya.
■ma■■na-vair■gya means that in India, the Hindus, they burn the dead body.
So relatives take the dead body for burning to the burning gh■■a, and when the body is burned,
everyone present there, for the time being, they become little renounced: "Oh, this is the body. We are
working for this body. Now it is finished. It is burnt into ashes. So what is the benefit?" This kind of
vair■gya, renouncement, is there. But as soon as he comes from the burning gh■■a, he again begins
his activities. In the ■ma■■na, in the burning gh■■a, he becomes renounced. And as soon as come
home, again he is vigorous, vigorous how to earn, how to get money, how to get money, how to get
money.
So this kind of vair■gya is called ■ma■■na-vair■gya, temporary. He cannot become vair■g■. And he
said, na k■■k■e vijayam (BG 1.31): "I don't want victory. I don't want this." This is temporary
sentiment. Temporary sentiment. These people, they attach to family life. They may say like that, that "I
don't want this happiness, don't want this very nice position, victory. I don't want," but he wants
everything. He wants everything. Because he does not know what is the ■reya. ■reya is K■■■a.
Actually when one gets K■■■a, or K■■■a consciousness, then he can say that, "I don't want this."
They will not say that. Why they will say: "Don't want this"? Here, what we have got? Suppose I have
got a kingdom. So that is my kingdom? No. That is K■■■a's kingdom. Because K■■■a says,
bhokt■ra■ yajña-tapas■■ sarva-loka-mahe■varam (BG 5.29). He is the proprietor. I may be His
representative. K■■■a wants that everyone should be K■■■a conscious.
So the king's duty is, as representative of K■■■a, to make every citizen K■■■a conscious. Then he is
doing nice duty. And because the monarchs did not do so, therefore now monarchy is abolished
everywhere. So again the monarchs, wherever there is monarchy, little, at least show of monarchy, just
like here in England there is, actually if the monarch becomes K■■■a conscious, actually becomes
representative of K■■■a, then the whole face of the kingdom will change. That is required. Our
K■■■a consciousness movement is for that purpose.
We don't very much like this so-called democracy. What is the value of this democracy? All fools and
rascals. They vote another fool and rascal, and he becomes prime minister, or this or that. Just like . . .
in so many cases. That is not good for the people. We are not for this so-called democracy, because
they are not trained. If the king is trained . . . that was the system of monarchy. Just like Yudhi■■hira
Mah■r■ja or Arjuna or anyone. All the kings. R■jar■i. They were called r■jar■i.
Eva■ parampar■-pr■ptam ima■ r■jar■ayo vidu■ (BG 4.2). R■jar■aya■. R■ja, kin, means he is not
only king; he is a great ■■i, saintly person, just like Mah■r■ja Yudhi■■hira or Arjuna. They're saintly
person. They are not ordinary, this drunkard kings that, "I have got so much money. Let me drink and
let there be dancing of the prostitute." Not like that. They were ■■i. Although they were king, they were
■■is. That kind of king wanted, r■jar■i. Then people will be happy. In Bengali there is a proverb, r■ja
p■p■ r■jya na■■a g■hi■■ do■■ g■hastha bhra■■a. In g■hastha life, in household life, if the wife is
not good, then nobody will be happy in that home, g■hastha life, household life. Similarly, in a kingdom,
if the king is impious, then everything . . . everyone will suffer. This is the proverb.
So K■■■a . . . Arjuna is thinking of the ■reya and preya. Actual ■reya means to achieve K■■■a
consciousness. That is wanting in Arjuna. He is showing that feature of life, that he wants better the
society, friendship and love. He does not want to kill them. Then everything will be finished. But
actually, the fact is that even after killing the so-called kinsmen, if he can satisfy K■■■a, that is his
■reya. That is his ■reya. That he does not know. And because he does not know, therefore this
Bhagavad-g■t■ is there. He is playing the part that he does not know that K■■■a is the ultimate goal
of life, not this so-called society, friendship and love. He is playing that part, that he does not know. He
is thinking that, "K■■■a is not important." K■■■a has already asked him to fight, but he is considering
that, "K■■■a, You are asking me to fight, and I have to kill my own kinsmen. Then where is my
victory?"
So therefore he said . . . here in the previous verse, he has said, pa■y■mi vipar■t■ni ke■ava (BG
1.30): "You are asking me to fight, for my victory, for my happiness, but I see it will be just the
opposite." Pa■y■mi vipar■t■ni. This is his problem. And to solve this problem, Arjuna became the
disciple of K■■■a, and K■■■a advised him this Bhagavad-g■t■, and that is the prelude. Unless
Arjuna plays like that, ordinary man . . .
Anyone . . . everyone wants to be happy with this g■ha-k■etra-sut■pta-vittai■ (SB 5.5.8), household
life, and having some land. Now in those days there was no industry. Therefore industry is not meant.
Land. If you get land, then you can produce your food. But actually that is our life. Here in this village
we find so much land lying vacant, but they are not producing their food. They make their food the
cows, poor cows, to kill them and eat. This is not good. G■ha-k■etra.
You become g■hastha, but you produce your food from the land, g■ha-k■etra. And when you produce
food, then beget children, g■ha-k■etra-suta-■pta-vitta. In India in village, there is, still the system is
amongst the poor men, the cultivators, that if the cultivator cannot provide to keep a cow, he will not
marry. Jaru and goru. Jaru means wife, and goru means cow. So one should keep a wife if he is able to
keep a cow also. Jaru and goru. Because if you keep a wife, immediately there will be children. But if
you cannot give them cows' milk, the children will be rickety, not very healthy. They must drink sufficient
milk. So cow is therefore considered mother. Because one mother has given birth to the child, the
another mother is supplying milk. So everyone should be obliged to mother cow, because she is
supplying milk.
So according to our ■■stra there are seven mothers. ■dau m■t■, real mother, from whose body I
have taken my birth. ■dau m■t■, she is mother. Guru-patn■, the wife of teacher, she is also mother.
■dau m■t■ guru-patn■, br■hma■■. The wife of a br■hma■a, she is also mother. ■dau m■t■
guru-patn■ br■hma■■ r■ja-patnik■: the queen is mother. So how many? ■dau m■t■ guru-patn■
br■hma■■ r■ja-patnik■, then dhenu. Dhenu means cow. She is also mother. And dh■tr■. Dh■tr■
means nurse. Dhenu dh■tr■ tath■ p■thv■, also the earth. Earth is also mother. The people are taking
care of mother land, where he is born. That is good. But by the by, they should take care of mother
cows also. But they are not taking care of mother. Therefore they are sinful. They must suffer. They
must have . . . there must be war, pestilence, famine. As soon as people become sinful, immediately
nature's punishment will come automatically. You cannot avoid it.
Therefore K■■■a consciousness movement means solution of all problem, teaching people not to
become sinful. Because a sinful man cannot become K■■■a conscious. To become K■■■a
conscious means that he has to give up his sinful activities: no illicit sex life, no meat-eating, no
intoxication, no gambling. These are the four pillars of sinful life. So people are not ready to give up this.
But we do not make any compromise, that you go on with your sinful life, at the same time I sanction
that you have become K■■■a conscious. No, that we cannot do. There is no compromise on this
point. You must give up all this sinful life. Because there is no chance of becoming K■■■a conscious.
Why you shall make a show? There is no benefit by making a show. Just like Arjuna. Arjuna is trying to
make a show of K■■■a consciousness. He has good attachment for other things. And the whole
Bhagavad-g■t■ is taught to Arjuna to give up that attachment.
So ultimately it is said that . . . Sañjaya said, yatra yoge■vara■ k■■■a■.
This is the conclusion of Bhagavad-g■t■. Sañjaya uv■ca. And at last Sañjaya said to his master,
Dh■tar■■■ra, "My dear master, you are expecting victory between the fight, fight between your sons
and . . . but don't expect it. It is," matir mama, "in my opinion," yatra k■■■a■ yoge■vara, "the party
where K■■■a the Yoge■vara . . ." Yoge■vara.
yoga, yoga, there are powerful mystic power. yoga means mystic power. Not this yoga, this playing
some gymnastic. That is not. yoga means when one becomes perfect in yoga, he gets many siddhis.
They are called a■■a-siddhi, eight kind of siddhi. A■im■, laghim■, pr■pti-siddhi, like that, so many.
■■itva, va■itva. So a yog■, a■im■, he can become the smaller than the smallest. We are already
smaller than the smallest, because our real dimension, spiritual dimension, is one ten-thousandth part
of the tip of the hair. This is our dimension. This is only outward covering, this body.
Ke■■gra-■ata-bh■gasya ■atadh■ kalpitasya ca (CC Madhya 19.140). So a yog■ can give up this
body and come to his original, spiritual body, and it is so small that you can . . . cannot keep yog■ in
prison, anywhere. Because there is some hole, he'll get out. This is yog■. This is mystic power.
What do they know about mystic power? They simply press the nose, that's all. (laughter) This kind of
yoga . . . of course, these are preliminary processes, dhy■na, dh■ra■■, pr■■■y■ma. This
pr■■■y■ma requires to get the breathing from the opposite side. We have got experience. The two
holes of the nostril, one is blocked, one is open. So pr■■■y■ma means to try to open the blocked side.
That is called . . . (indistinct) . . . therefore. So there are so many processes. But ultimate yoga means
to get this power. That is yoga. So all these powers, they are simply fragmental. The yog■s, they can
attain. Although they can become, they are already smaller than the smallest.
So K■■■a is the supreme master of all mystic power. Therefore He is called Yoge■vara. He is called
Yoge■vara. So if K■■■a is on your side, then you do not require to practice yoga. If you are a devotee
of K■■■a . . . because how much power you shall get? You may gain some power by this mystic
process, but you cannot be equal with K■■■a's power. Just like a■im■, laghim■. To make everything
very light, or become very light, the yog■ can fly in the air without an aeroplane. He can go even in the
sun planet, moon planet, without any sputnik. Simply . . .
(break) . . . his wife. But he was a yog■, and she was devoted, so became lean and thin, because she
could not eat very nicely. A yog■ cannot supply nice food. Simply starvation, starvation. (laughs) That
is yog■. So he thought that, "This poor girl came to me, his (her) father is king. She is not accustomed
to so much trouble," so he asked her, "What you want?" "No, because I have come to you, I want some
children and a little comfortable life." "All right." So he made a aeroplane by yogic power, a big town.
Not this 747. The 747 is the biggest plane, but not like this. A big town with lake, with palatial building,
maidservants, servants, and that big plane went all round the universe. He showed all the planets to his
wife. This is yogic power. This is yogic power. So where is that yog■?
So here, Yoge■vara. All these mystic powers can be attained by ordinary man if he wants; there is
process. But K■■■a is the master of all yogic power, Yoge■vara. So who can get victory? K■■■a can
do anything. Just like we sing every day, jaya r■dh■-m■dhava kuñja-bih■r■ gop■-jana-vallabha
giri-vara-dh■r■ (Jaya R■dh■-M■dhava). Giri-vara-dh■r■. People may take it that K■■■a is fond of
some gop■s, but they do not take care of the K■■■a's other business. As soon as the gop■s are in
danger, he can lift the Govardhana Hill, Giri-vara-dh■r■. That is K■■■a. The rascal, they do not know.
They think that K■■■a is after the gop■s, therefore He is immoral. But the rascal has no eyes to see
that K■■■a may be immoral in his eye, but here is Yoge■vara. At the same time, Yoge■vara.
So without becoming a disciple in the bhakti-yoga, nobody can study K■■■a. It is not possible.
Bhakty■ m■m abhij■n■ti y■v■n ya■ c■smi tattvata■ (BG 18.55). So the whole thing,
Bhagavad-g■t■ is there, how to understand K■■■a. As soon as you understand K■■■a, tyaktv■
deha■ punar janma naiti m■m eti kaunteya (BG 4.9): there is no more again birth in this material world.
You go back to home, back to Godhead.
Thank you very much.
Devotees: Haribol. (end)
