Pradyumna: . . . bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo bhagavate
v■sudev■ya. (leads chanting of verse) (Prabhup■da and devotees repeat)
(break)
na—do not; hi—certainly; prapa■y■mi—I see; mama—my; apanudy■t—they can drive away;
yat—that; ■okam—lamentation; uccho■a■am—drying up; indriy■■■m—of the senses;
av■pya—achieving; bh■mau—on the earth; asapatnam—without rival; ■ddham—prosperous;
r■jyam—kingdom; sur■■■m—of the demigods; api—even; ca—also; ■dhipatyam—supremacy.
Translation: "I can find no means to drive away this grief which is drying up my senses. I will not be able
to destroy it if even if I win an unrivalled kingdom on the earth with sovereignty like the demigods in
heaven."
Prabhup■da: Na hi prapa■y■mi mam■panudy■d. This is the position of material existence. We are
sometimes in difficulty. Not sometimes; always we are in difficulty, but we call it sometimes, because to
get over the difficulty, we make some attempt, and that attempt-making is taken as happiness. Actually
there is no happiness. But sometimes, with the hope that "By this attempt, I shall become happy in
future . . ." As the so-called scientists are dreaming, "In future, we shall become without death." So
many, they are dreaming. But those who are sane person, they say: "Trust no future, however
pleasant."
So that is the actual position. Na hi prapa■y■mi mam■panudy■d. Therefore he has approached
K■■■a, ■i■yas te 'ham (BG 2.7): "I . . . now I become Your ■i■ya." "Why you have come to Me?"
"Because I know nobody else can save me from this dangerous position." This is real sense. Yac
chokam uccho■a■am indriy■■■m (BG 2.8). Uccho■a■am. When we are put into great difficulties, it
dries up the existence of the senses. No sense enjoyment also can make us happy. Uccho■a■am
indriy■n■m. Here happiness means sense gratification.
Here . . . actually this is not happiness. Real happiness is described in the Bhagavad-g■t■:
at■ndriyam, sukham atyant■ka■ yat tat at■ndriyam (BG 6.21). Real happiness, atyantikam, supreme
happiness, is not enjoyed by the senses. At■ndriya: surpassing, transcendental to the senses. That is
real happiness. But we have taken happiness as sense enjoyment. So by sense enjoyment, nobody
can become happy, because we are in the material existence, and our senses are false senses. Real
senses—spiritual senses.
So we have to awaken our spiritual consciousness. Then by spiritual senses we can enjoy. Sukham
atyantika■ yat at■ndriya (BG 6.21). Surpassing these senses. Surpassing these senses means . . .
these senses are . . . means covering. Just like I am this body. Actually I'm not this body, I am spirit
soul. But this is the covering of my real body, spiritual body. Similarly, spiritual body has spiritual
senses. Not that nir■k■ra. Why nir■k■ra? It is a commonsense affair. Just like if you have got a hand,
a . . . or two, one or two hands, you have got two hands; therefore when the hand is covered by some
cloth, the cloth also gets a hand.
Because I have got hand, therefore my dress has got a hand. Because I have got my legs, therefore my
covering, dress, has got legs, pant. It is a commonsense affair. Wherefrom this body came? This body's
described v■s■■si, garments. So garment means it is cut according to the body. That is garment. Not
that my body is made according to the garment. It is a commonsense affair. So when I have got hands
of my shirt, this is my subtle body or gross body; therefore originally, spiritually, I have got my hands
and legs. Otherwise, how it comes? How do you develop?
So originally we are all person, no imperson. K■■■a also says . . . He'll say that, "These soldiers,
these kings, you and Me, My dear Arjuna, it is not that we did not exist in the past. Neither it is that in
future we shall cease to exist." So this particular instruction of K■■■a that, "I, you and all these kings
and soldiers who have assembled here, they existed. As we are existing now, individual person,
similarly, they existed, individual person. And in future also we shall exist as individual person." So
where is the question of imperson? These nonsense impersonalist, voidist. Therefore, the principle is,
to understand things in reality, one has to approach K■■■a as Arjuna has approached, ■i■yas te
'ham (BG 2.7): "Now I am Your disciple. You just teach me." ■■dhi m■■ prapannam: "I am
surrendering. I am not trying to talk with You on equal level."
To accept guru means whatever guru says, you have to accept. Otherwise, don't make guru. Don't
make a fashion. You must be ready. That is called prapannam. Tad viddhi pra■ip■tena (BG 4.34). You
can understand simply by surrendering, not to test guru, "I shall test him how . . . how much he knows."
Then what is the use of making guru? No. Therefore Arjuna says that "Besides You, there is nobody
else who can actually satisfy me in this perplexed condition." Yac chokam uccho■a■am indriy■■■m
(BG 2.8). "My senses are being dried up." Because the superficial senses . . . that are not actually
senses.
Real sense is within. H■■■ke■a h■■■ke■a-sevanam (CC Madhya 19.170). We have to serve
K■■■a, H■■■ke■a. K■■■a is real, and we have to come to that position of reality. Then we can
serve K■■■a, H■■■ke■a—tat paratvena nirmalam—when our senses are purified. Indriy■■i par■■y
■hur indriyebhya■ para■ mana■, manasas tu paro buddhir (BG 3.42). These are different stages. This
bodily concept of life means senses. But when you transcend these senses, you come to the mental
platform. When you transcend the mental platform, you come to the intellectual platform. When you
come to the intellectual platform, when you transcend, then you come to the spiritual platform. That is
spiritual form.
There are different grades and steps. In the gross bodily platform we demand pratyak■a-jñ■nam.
Pratyak■a means direct perception. There are different stages of knowledge: pratyak■a, aparak■ya . .
. pratyak■a, parok■a, aparok■a, adhok■aja, aprak■ta. These are different stages of knowledge. So
knowledge acquired in the bodily platform, direct perception, is not real knowledge.
Therefore we can challenge these scientists, so-called scientists. Their basic principle of knowledge is
on the bodily concept of life, pratyak■a, experimental knowledge. Experimental knowledge means this
gross sense perception. That is experimental. Pratyak■a. Everyone says: "We do not see God." God is
not such a subject matter that you can see with this pratyak■a, direct perception. God's another name
is Anubh■va. Anubh■va. Just like in this room we do not see the sun directly, but we know that there is
sun. It is daytime. How do you know it? You do not see. But there are other processes by which you
can experience. That is called aparok■a. Pratyak■a, parok■a, aparok■a.
In this way, K■■■a consciousness means adhok■aja and aprak■ta: beyond the senses. Therefore, in
the Bhagavad-g■t■ it is said adhok■aja: where direct perception cannot reach. So where direct
perception cannot reach, then how you can perceive anubh■va? That is ■rota-panth■. That is ■ruti.
You have to take knowledge from the Vedas. And the Vedic knowledge is explained by guru. Therefore
one has to take shelter of K■■■a as the Supreme guru or His representative. Then all these troubles,
means ignorance, can be dissipated. Yac chokam uccho■a■am indriy■■■m (BG 2.8).
So now K■■■a may say: "There are . . . that's all right. You are, for temporarily, you go on fighting.
And when you will get the kingdom, you'll be happy. There is no need of making Me guru. Neither it is . .
." Just like ordinary men, they think so that, "We are earning so much money. What is the use of
making a guru? I can understand everything in my own way." And another rascal is, "Yes, yata mata
tata patha. Whatever their opinion, that's all right. You can make your own opinion." That is going on.
You can make your own opinion to understand God. So all foolish rascals, they're making their own
opinion. No. That is not possible.
Therefore K■■■a . . . Arjuna says, av■pya bh■m■u asaptnam ■ddham (BG 2.8). This is very
significant word, sapatni. Sapatni means rival wife, co-wife. If a man has got two, three wives . . . why
two, three? Our Lord had 16,100. So this is God. So sapatnya, but there is no competition. You'll find in
the statements of all the queens in K■■■a Book, when they were talking with Kunt■, er, Draupad■,
every wife was giving description that how much she was anxious to become maidservant of K■■■a.
Nobody is rival. In the material world, if a man has got more than one wife, there is rivalry. Rivalry.
This example is given in the ■r■mad-Bh■gavatam that just like we have got our senses, similarly, if
somebody has got different wife, so one wife is snatching him that, "You come to my room," another
wife is snatching, "You come to my room." So he's perplexed. Similarly, we have got these wives, the
senses. The eyes are dragging, "Please come to the cinema." The tongue is dragging, "Please come to
the restaurant." The hand is driving somewhere else. The leg is driving somewhere. So our position is
like that: the same man, who has got different wives and dragging him different rooms. This is our
position.
So why this position? Because these wives are rivals. Here: asapatnyam. If there are many kings to
claim one property, there is difficulty. And Arjuna says, av■pya bh■m■v asaptnyam ■ddham (BG 2.8).
"Getting riches for which there is no other claimant. I am the only proprietor. Even if I get such riches,"
r■jyam, "such kingdom," sur■■■m api c■dhipatyam, "Not only kingdom of this world, but also
kingdom of higher planetary system . . ." These men are trying to go to the moon planet, but there is . . .
that is also another kingdom. Another kingdom.
So that kingdom belongs to the higher living entities, those who are known as demigods. They are very
powerful. Just like Indra. Indra is very powerful controller of the rains. He has got the thunderbolt. But
people do not believe this, but we believe. What is described in the Vedic literatures . . . not believe.
You have to believe. This is fact. Wherefrom this thunderbolt is coming? Who is arranging for the rain?
There must be some director. As in government offices or state, there are so many departmental
management, similarly, in God's government there must be so many directors, so many officers. They
are called demigods. Devar■i-bh■t■pta-n■■■■ pit■■■m (SB 11.5.41).
Devat■■, the demigods, they are also supplying us by the order of K■■■a. Just like Indra. Indra is
supplying us. Therefore Indra yajña, there is sacrifice for satisfying the different demigods. K■■■a
stopped this Indra yajña, you know, Govardhana. When Nanda Mah■r■ja was arranging for Indra
yajña, K■■■a said: "My dear father, there is no need of Indra yajña." That means anyone who is
K■■■a conscious, for him, there is no need of any yajña. Especially in this age, Kali-yuga, it is very
difficult to perform different types of yajña. That was possible in the Treta-yuga. K■te yad dhy■yato
vi■■u■ tret■y■■ yajato makhai■ (SB 12.3.52). Makhai■ means yajña, performing yajña. Yajñ■rthe
karma■o 'nyatra loko 'ya■ karma-bandhana■ (BG 3.9).
So these formulas, these direction, nobody is following. It is not possible in this age. Therefore the
■■stra injunction is, yajñai■ sa■k■rtanair pr■yair yajanti hi sumedhasa■. Those who have got good
brain substance, so instead of bothering with so many things, one performs sa■k■rtana-yajña. These
are the statements in the ■■stra.
So here, in this room especially, k■■■a-var■a■ tvi■■k■■■am, here is Caitanya Mah■prabhu. He is
K■■■a Himself, but His complexion is ak■■■a, "not blackish." K■■■a-var■a■ tvi■a . . . tvi■a
means by complexion. Ak■■■a. Yellowish. Sa■gopa■g■stra-p■r■adam: and He's accompanied by
His associates, Nity■nanda Prabhu, Advaita Prabhu, ■r■v■s■di gaura-bhakta-v■nda. This is the
worshipable Deity in this age. K■■■a-var■a■ tvi■■k■■■a.
So what is the process of worship? Yajñai■ sa■k■rtanair pr■yair yajanti hi sumedhasa■. This
sa■k■rtana-yajña as we are performing before Lord Caitanya, Nity■nanda and others, this is the
perfect performance of yajña in this age. Otherwise, no other . . . therefore it is becoming successful.
This is the only prescribed yajña. Other yajñas, R■jas■ya yajña, this yajña, that . . . there are so many
yajñas. And sometimes India, they perform so-called yajñas. They collect some money, that's all. It
cannot be successful, because there is no yajñic br■hma■a.
The yajñic br■hma■a is not in existence at the present moment. The yajñic br■hma■a used to test
how correctly they are pronouncing Vedic mantra. The test was that one animal should be put into the
fire, and he would again come with fresh, young body. Then it is tested that the yajña is being
performed nicely. The br■hma■a, the yajñic br■hma■a, they are pronouncing the Veda mantra
correctly, this is the test. But where is that br■hma■a in this age? Therefore no yajña is recommended.
Kalau pañca vivarjayet.
So there is no yajña in this age. There is no yajñic br■hma■a. This is the only yajña: chant Hare
K■■■a mantra and dance in ecstasy. This is the only yajña.
So r■jya■ sur■■■m api c■dhipatyam (BG 2.8). Formerly there were many demons who conquered
over the kingdom of the demigods. R■jya■ sur■■■m api c■dhipatyam. Just like Hira■yaka■ipu. He
spread his authority even over the kingdom of Indra. Indr■ri-vy■kula■ loke m■dayanti yuge yuge (SB
1.3.28). Indr■ri. Indr■ri means the enemy of Indra. Indra is the king of the heavenly planet, and enemy
means the demons. The demigods and their enemy, demons. Just like we have got many enemies.
Because we are chanting Hare K■■■a mantra, there are so many critics and so many enemies also.
They do not like. So this is always. Now the number has increased. Formerly, there were some. Now
there are many.
So therefore indr■ri-vy■kula■ lokam. When these demons, the population, demonic population
increases, then vy■kula■ lokam: people become perplexed. Indr■ri vy■kula■ loka■ m■dayanti yuge
yuge. So when . . . at that time, K■■■a comes. Ete c■■■a-kal■■ pu■sa■ k■■■as tu bhagav■n
svayam (SB 1.3.28). There are list of names of the incarnation of K■■■a and God, or God. But after
mentioning all the names, the Bh■gavata indicates that, "All the names listed herewith, they are partial
representation of K■■■a. But the name K■■■a is there. He's real, original Personality of . . ."
K■■■as tu bhagav■n svayam. And He comes . . . indr■ri-vy■kula■ loke. When people are too much
embarrassed by the onslaught of the demons, He comes. And He also confirms. This is ■■stra. One
■■stra says He comes in this condition. And K■■■a says: "Yes, yad■ yad■ hi dharmasya gl■nir
bhavati bh■rata tad■tm■na■ s■j■my aham (BG 4.7): at that time, I come."
So in this Kali-yuga, people are so much disturbed. Therefore, K■■■a has come in the form of His
name, Hare K■■■a. K■■■a has come not personally, but by His name. But because K■■■a is
absolute, there is no difference between His name and Himself. Abhinnatv■n n■ma-n■mino■.
N■ma-cint■ma■i k■■■a-caitanya-rasa-vigraha■ p■r■a■ ■uddho nitya-mukta■ (CC Madhya
17.133). Name is full. As K■■■a is full, complete, similarly K■■■a's name is also full, complete.
■uddha. It is not material things. P■r■a■ ■uddha■ nitya■, eternal. As K■■■a is eternal, the name is
also eternal. P■r■a■ ■uddha■ nitya-mukta■. There is no material conception in chanting Hare
K■■■a mantra. Abhinnatv■n n■ma-n■mino■. N■ma, the holy name and the Lord, they are abhinna,
identical.
So we cannot be happy . . . r■jya■ sur■■■m api c■dhipatyam (BG 2.8). Even if we get the kingdom of
the demigods, asapatya, without any rival, still we cannot be happy so long we have got material
conception of life. It is not possible. That is explained in this verse.
(aside) What is the time?
Thank you very much. That's all. (end)
