Pradyumna: . . . v■sudev■ya. O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. (Prabhup■da and devotees repeat)
(leads chanting of verse)
(break)
Prabhup■da: All right. Word meaning?
Pradyumna:
p■ñcajanyam—the conchshell named P■ñcajanya; h■■■ke■a■—H■■■ke■a (K■■■a, the Lord
who directs the senses of the devotees); devadattam—the conchshell named Devadatta;
dhanañjaya■—Dhanañjaya (Arjuna, the winner of wealth); pau■■ram—the conch named Pau■■ram;
dadhmau—blew; mah■-■a■kham—the terrific conchshell; bh■ma-karm■—one who performs
Herculean tasks; v■kodara■—the voracious eater (Bh■ma).
Translation: "Then Lord K■■■a blew His conchshell, named P■ñcajanya; Arjuna blew his, the
Devadatta; and Bh■ma, the voracious eater and performer of Herculean tasks, blew his terrific
conchshell named Pau■■ram."
Prabhup■da: So V■kodara, Bh■masena, is advertised as voracious eater. But he can perform
Herculean task also. Just like the elephant, it eats voraciously, but it gives service also. Similarly, if we
simply eat voraciously and we cannot give any service, that is not good. We must eat sumptuously and
give service also. In Bengali it is said that pe■e keli pi■he soya, if one is given sufficient food in the
belly, he can carry more burden on the back. So bh■ma-karma, his activities were very Herculean;
very, very difficult tasks he performed.
So everyone is named here with his task. The first name is, K■■■a, H■■■ke■a. H■■■ke■a. He is
the master of the senses. Govinda. Go, go means senses, "Who gives pleasure to the senses." So
K■■■a has got many names, thousands, out of which the K■■■a name is chief, mukhya. That is
described in Vedic literature. People say God has no name. That is right. He has no particular fixed
name. But His names are there according to His different activities. Just like His name is
Devak■-nandana.
Because He accepted Devak■ as His mother, therefore He is called Devak■-nandana. Similarly, He is
called Nanda-nandana, Ya■od■-nandana, Vrajendra-nandana—in relationship with Nanda Mah■r■ja,
Ya■od■, His foster father and mother. Similarly, He is sometimes named P■rtha-s■rathi because He
acted as the chariot driver of Arjuna. Arjuna's name is P■rtha. His mother's name is P■th■, Kunt■'s.
From P■th■, his name is P■rtha. From his father's name, P■■■u, his name is P■■■ava. So in this
way, big personalities or anyone, they should tally . . . the name should tally with the activities. This is
nomenclature.
In the . . . according to Vedic civilization, after the birth of the child there was name-giving ceremony,
what kind of name. So that was calculated astrologically, that what kind of name he should be given,
because the name should carry some meaning of the activities of his life. So K■■■a is named here
H■■■ke■a.
H■■■ke■a, K■■■a, in the Fifteenth Chapter is described that He gives direction to everyone.
Sarvasya c■ha■ h■di sannivi■■a■ (BG 15.15): "I am sitting in everyone's heart as Param■tm■."
Realization of the Absolute Truth are three features: Brahman, Param■tm■ and Bhagav■n.
Brahman, Param■tm■ and Bhagav■n, the same object.
So the Brahman realization is impersonal realization. Just like the sun, the sun globe and the sunshine,
they are one. But the sunshine, realization of the sunshine, is not realization of the sun globe. Or
realization of the sun globe is not realization of the sun god who is within the sun globe. Vivasv■n. His
name is Vivasv■n. The present predominating Deity in the sun planet, his name is Vivasv■n. And his
son Manu is called Vaivasvata Manu. This is the age of Vaivasvata Manu. So at the . . . this is very nice
example, that the sunshine, the sun globe and the sun-god. They are all one, but still, the sun globe is
not the person sun-god; neither the sunshine is not the person sun, although they are one. This is
called acintya-bhed■bheda-tattva, inconceivably one and different simultaneously.
So Brahman realization is also God realization, but it is partial. The Supreme Lord is
sac-cid-■nanda-vigraha■ (Bs. 5.1). He is person, but He is not a person like us. He is
sac-cid-■nanda-vigraha■. ■■vara■ parama■ k■■■a■ sac-cid-■nanda-vigraha■.
Vigraha means person. So He is person, Bhagav■n. Brahmeti param■tmeti bhagav■n iti ■abdyate
(SB 1.2.11). Three features, realization of the Absolute. The first realization, imperfect realization, is
impersonal Brahman. Further advanced realization—Param■tm■ realization. And ultimate
realization—the Supreme Personality of Godhead, K■■■a. These are the three stages. So when He is
H■■■ke■a, it is His Param■tm■ feature. As it is stated in the Bhagavad-g■t■:
■■vara, the Supreme Lord, K■■■a . . . ■■vara means the Supreme; ■■vara means controller. But
the supreme controller is K■■■a. ■■vara■ parama■ k■■■a■ (Bs. 5.1). Controller, every one of us,
we are controller. We control our family, our society, our business, our factory. There are different kinds
of controller. So in that sense everyone is ■■vara, but different types of ■■vara. But the supreme
■■vara . . . supreme means nobody controls Him, but He controls everyone. That is Supreme. Here we
are controller, but we are also controlled, somebody else, superior than me. Therefore we cannot be
called supreme controller. Supreme controller is K■■■a.
When K■■■a was present on this planet, nobody could control K■■■a, but He controlled everyone.
Nobody could control K■■■a. So therefore the great saintly persons, even Brahm■, they have decided
that ■■vara■ parama■ k■■■a■ (Bs. 5.1): "The supreme controller is K■■■a." He controls even
Brahm■, ■di-kavaye. In the ■r■mad-Bh■gavatam it is said, tene brahma h■d■ ■di-kavaye (SB
1.1.1). Tene, He instructed Brahm■ ■abda-brahma, Vedic knowledge, h■d■, through heart. That is
H■■■ke■a.
You can argue that "Brahm■ was the first creature within this universe. So how he could be instructed
by somebody else?" No. The somebody else is always there within the heart, H■■■ke■a. H■■■ke■a
means controller. Sarvasya c■ham . . . K■■■a says in the Bhagavad-g■t■, sarvasya, in the Fifteenth
Chapter, sarvasya ca aha■ h■di sannivi■■a■: "I am sitting in everyone's heart." Matta■ sm■tir
jñ■nam apohana■ ca (BG 15.15): "From Me, one remembers and one forgets also." Forgets also. If
you want to forget K■■■a, so K■■■a will give you such intelligence that you will forget Him forever.
Ye yath■ m■■ prapadyante t■■s tathaiva bhaj■my aham (BG 4.11).
So the atheist class, demon class, they want to forget K■■■a. So K■■■a gives him such intelligence
that he can speak of atheism so many volumes. But he is getting that intelligence from K■■■a.
K■■■a gives everyone the chance that, "Whatever you want to do, you can do. I will give you
intelligence. So if you want to become atheist, then I will give you intelligence how to become first-class
atheist, like Hira■yaka■ipu, R■va■a, Ka■sa. And if you want to become devotee, then I will give you
intelligence also in that way."
Buddhi-yoga■ dad■mi ta■ yena m■m upay■nti te. Te■■■ nitya-yukt■n■■ bhajat■■
pr■ti-p■rvakam (BG 10.10). Anyone who is engaged in His service with love and affection, te■■m, not
all, not all . . . because not all, not everyone wants to serve Him. Everyone wants to become God,
imitator, imitation. Therefore they say: "Why K■■■a shall be alone God? I am God." You are god,
that's all right. But you are not the Supreme God. Why you forget that? Above you . . . you may be a
god at home of your wife, but when you go to your office, you are not god; your master is god. He
directs you to do something, you have to do it.
So we may claim that, "Every one of us, we are God," but nobody can claim that "We are Supreme; I
am Supreme God." That is not possible. That can . . . K■■■a can claim only. Matta■ paratara■
n■nyat kiñcid asti dhanañjaya (BG 7.7): "My dear Dhanañjaya, there is no more superior personality
than Me." And He proved it. So God cannot be manufactured. God is God. K■■■a, when He was three
months old on the lap of His mother, still He was God. He could kill the P■tan■. So God cannot be
manufactured by so-called meditation and mystic power. You can get some of the insignificant powers
of God, but simply . . . but you do not know how much powerful is God. That you do not know.
Therefore when a person gets little power, he thinks that he has become God. He does not know how
much powerful God is.
So therefore ■■stra says that, "You may be god in your own atmosphere, in your own jurisdiction. You
may think that you are God." Everyone thinks like that, "But the Supreme God is K■■■a." Eko yo
bah■n■■ vidadh■ti k■m■n. In the Upani■ads it is said that God is also a person like me, you. Nityo
nity■n■■ cetana■ cetan■n■m (Ka■ha Upani■ad 2.2.13). But His personality is different from your
personality, from my personality. What is that difference? Eko yo bah■n■■ vidadh■ti k■m■n: "He
supplies all the necessities of all other personalities." That is the difference. God is supplying us food.
This conception is there in the Bible, "God, give us our daily bread." This is nice. Accepting that you are
getting all supplies from God, this is suk■ti, this is pu■yavat.
If one, anyone says: "Oh, what God? We are creating our own food"—just like the Communist
says—they are du■k■tina, rascals. But if anyone even goes to the church and temple for asking
something to God, he is pious. At least, he has approached God. So one day, when he will be
advanced devotee, he will not ask anymore. He knows that, "Why shall I bother God? He is supplying
everyone food, so why shall I ask Him food? My food is also there. Let me serve me (Him)." That is his
higher intelligence.
(break) . . . that, "Why shall I ask food from God? God is supplying food to the cats, dogs, ants,
elephants, and I want little food, He will not supply me? And especially when I engage myself in His
service? Ordinary man pays to his servant, and I shall starve if I am engaged in the service of God?"
This is intelligence. This is intelligence. "Why shall I bother God? If He likes, I will starve. That doesn't
matter. But I must engage myself in the service of the Lord." This is intelligence. Bah■n■■ janman■m
ante jñ■nav■n m■■ prapadyate (BG 7.19). This intelligence comes after many, many births of
endeavoring for self-realization. It is not easily comes.
So there is no question of scarcity for devotee, just like this morning I was discussing with a gentleman.
So a devotee is not in need of everything. Why he should be? He cannot be. Even one who is not
devotee, if he is getting supplies from God, how is it that the devotee will not get? Just like the
government. The government, although there is prison house, the government supplies the food. Not
that because they have gone to the prison house, they are starving. Rather, those who are
unemployed, they prefer prison house, that without any service they will get free food.
So anyone within this material world, they are prisoners. Bhr■mayan yantr■r■■h■ni m■yay■.
■■vara■ sarva-bh■t■n■■ h■d-de■e 'rjuna ti■■hati (BG 18.61). ■■vara, the Supreme Lord K■■■a
as H■■■ke■a, He is sitting in everyone's heart as Param■tm■, and He is guiding. This is confirmed in
the Vedas, that two birds are sitting on one tree. These two birds, one is K■■■a, and another the living
entity. Param■tm■ and j■v■tm■. The j■v■tm■ is eating the fruit, and Param■tm■ is simply
becoming witness. Anumant■ upadra■■■ (BG 13.23). Param■tm■ is seeing. H■■■ke■a is seeing
that you are doing this. So we may forget what nuisance we had done in our last life, but Param■tm■ is
there, witness. You have to get a body according to your work. karma■■ daiva-netre■a (SB 3.31.1).
You are working; that is being witnessed by the Param■tm■. And He is also giving advice.
Because we have forgotten K■■■a, we have rebelled against K■■■a. We want to act according to
our whims. Just like a child wants to do something according to his whims. Father checks him, "My dear
child, do not do this." But if he likes, if he persists, father says: "All right, you do it." This is the position.
The H■■■ke■a, Param■tm■, He is always guiding us, but we do not accept His guidance. This is our
position. Arjuna has accepted K■■■a that, "I shall be guided by You, although You'll not fight."
Therefore here it is said h■■■ke■a, He's guiding Arjuna. The h■■■ka means the senses.
H■■■ka-■■a. ■■a means Lord, master, ■■vara or ■■a. So H■■■ke■a.
Actually, He is the master of the senses. In the Bhagavad-g■t■ you will find, in the Eleventh Chapter it
is said, sarvata■ p■■i-p■das te, "God has His hands and legs all over the universe." What is that?
This, our hand, our legs, this is God's hands, God's leg. He is the master. I am claiming, "This is my
hand," but as soon as God withdraws the power of your hand, it is paralyzed—you cannot repair.
Therefore the real proprietor is K■■■a. You are not proprietor. You have been given the facility to use
it for . . . use it not for your sense gratification, but for the satisfaction of the Lord. Then your life is
perfect.
Because the things belongs to K■■■a. He is H■■■ke■a. He is the master. Just like we are sitting in
this house. Somebody has given us. Similarly, everything belongs to God. This is self-realization. My
body belongs to God, my mind belongs to God, my intelligence belongs to God; I am spirit soul, I am
part and parcel of God. Therefore everything belongs to . . . ■■■v■syam ida■ sarvam (ISO 1).
Everything belongs to God. So if you don't use it for God, that is called demonism. And if you use it for
God, that is devotion. That's all.
One must realize that, "Everything belongs to God; nothing belongs to me. Even this body is given to
me by God." Why a different body? The different body is . . . God gives us different body according to
our karma. That is explained. karma■■ daiva-netre■a jantur dehopapattaye (SB 3.31.1). How we get a
different type of body? We have got different types of body. Because according to our past karma, we
have created a certain type of body, and now we have entered into that body and working according to
past karma.
The Christian theologicians, they do not believe in the karma. I was student in Christian college,
Scottish Churches College. So in our younger days, the Professor, Dr. W. S. Urquhart. So I heard his
lecture, that he did not believe in the karmas. He said that, "If I am suffering or enjoying for my last
karma, who is the witness? Because some witness must be there that I have done this." But at that time
we were not very expert. But this H■■■ke■a is the witness, anumant■ upadra■■■. Upadra■■■. He
is simply seeing. So the Christians, they have no Param■tm■ idea. Sometimes they say Holy Ghost.
Not a clear idea. But this H■■■ke■a is clear idea. H■■■ke■a. H■■■ka-■■a.
So this bhakti, devotional path, is meant for satisfying the master of the senses. H■■■ke■a
h■■■ke■a-sevana■ bhaktir ucyate (CC Madhya 19.170). H■■■ke■a, by your senses, when you
serve the H■■■ke■a, the master of the senses, that is called bhakti. This is the definition of bhakti.
H■■■ke■a h■■■ke■a-sevana■ bhaktir ucyate, N■rada Pañcar■tra. So that is our business. We
should under . . . that is self-realization. ■■■v■syam ida■ sarvam (ISO 1). Everything belongs to God;
nothing belongs to us. This is Bh■gavata communism. As the Communists, they say: "Everything
belongs to the state," we say: "Everything belongs to God." We never say that anything belongs to
anyone. No. This is Bh■gavata communism.
So everything belongs to God. So one can utilize God's property as much as he requires, not more than
that. Then he will be thief; he will be punishable. Just like father's property. Each and every son has got
the right to live at the father's protection. M■ g■dha■ kasya svid dhanam (ISO 1). That is spiritual
communism. Whatever wealth is there within this universe all belong to God, and we are, as sons of
God, we have got right to take advantage of this wealth, but not more than what I require. That's all.
This is spiritual communism. If you take more, then you become punishable. This is the law of nature.
Therefore our aim of life should be to understand that every . . . to know . . . this is self-realization that,
"Everything belongs to God. Nothing belongs to us." This is self-realization. I also belong to God. My
this body made of five elements, gross body— bh■mir ■po 'nalo v■yu■ (BG 7.4), earth, water, fire, air,
sky—this is gross body. And subtle body, kha■ mano buddhir eva: mind, intelligence, ego. These eight.
K■■■a says, bhinn■ me prak■tir a■■adh■: "These eight kinds of prak■ti, they are My energy. They
are My energy." So this whole universe is creation of K■■■a's material energy.
We are marginal energy of K■■■a. So we are now put into this material energy because we wanted to
enjoy this material world. In the spiritual world the only enjoyer is K■■■a, either in spiritual or material
world. He is the only enjoyer. That is stated in the Bhagavad-g■t■, bhokt■ra■ yajña-tapas■■
sarva-loka-mahe■varam (BG 5.29): "I am the enjoyer." So this is to be understood, that He is the
supreme enjoyer. He is also enjoyer of my energy, because my energy is derived from K■■■a's
energy. Just like master and servant: the master is paying him food, anything, for comforts. He is
getting energy. So how the energy should be utilized? For the master, not for his sense gratification.
This is perfection of life. You produce anything by your energy, but you cannot use it for your sense
gratification. Then you become perfect. And if you want to do it, then H■■■ke■a, the master of the
senses, will give you intelligence how to do it. Just like He is giving Arjuna intelligence, therefore He is
mentioned as H■■■ke■a. How to win victory. How to utilize his energy for K■■■a. K■■■a wanted
the battle. Arjuna was a military man. He utilized his military strength for K■■■a's purposes. That is the
perfection of life.
So whatever you have got, if you utilize it for K■■■a's sake, h■■■ke■a h■■■ke■a-sevana■ bhakti
(CC Madhya 19.170), that is bhakti. Even by fighting, you can be a great devotee, just like Arjuna. He
was not chanting on the beads, but he was fighting. But still, bhakto 'si priyo 'si me (BG 4.3), K■■■a
says: "Oh, you are My great devotee."
Now people may say that, "He was not chanting. He was fighting. How he became a great devotee?"
But K■■■a says, bhakto 'si priyo 'si me: "You are My dear friend. You are My devotee. Because you
are utilizing your energy for Me." So bhakti means you utilize your energy for K■■■a. Then your life is
perfect.
Thank you very much.
Devotees: All glories to ■r■la Prabhup■da. (cut) (end)
