Pradyumna: (leads chanting of verse) (Prabhup■da and devotees repeat)
(break)
(break)
(break) (leads chanting of synonyms to (BG 1.10)
apary■ptam—immeasurable; tat—that; asm■kam—of ours; balam—strength; bh■■ma—by
Grandfather Bh■■ma; abhirak■itam—perfectly protected; pary■ptam—limited; tu—but; idam—all
these; ete■■m—of the P■■■avas; balam—strength; bh■ma—by Bh■ma; abhirak■itam—carefully
protected.
Translation: "Our strength is immeasurable, and we are perfectly protected by Grandfather Bh■■ma,
whereas the strength of the P■■■avas, carefully protected by Bh■ma, is limited."
Prabhup■da: Hm. So Duryodhana is very proud of his strength, military strength. Because he was
empowered, he could gather. And over and above that, Bh■■ma is the commander-in-chief. He is
giving protection. And on the other side, the P■■■avas, they are not empowered. Somehow or other,
they gathered some soldiers from relatives. Therefore their strength was limited in consideration of the
other party. And that is, being protected by Bh■ma. Duryodhana always considered Bh■ma as a fool.
Therefore he is very much confident that, "Our side is being protected by Bh■■ma, and the other side,
although Bh■ma is very strong, but he has no brain very much." So he was very hopeful of victory.
But in the previous verse he says, anye ca bahava■ ■■r■ mad-arthe tyakta-j■vit■■. Tyakta-j■vit■■
means, "They have come to lay down their life for me." This is a foretelling, because actually, whoever
joined the Battlefield of Kuruk■etra, none of them returned. Tyakta-j■vit■■. So it is already concluded
that although Duryodhana is very much proud of his military strength, protected by Bh■■ma, still,
tyakta-j■vit■■, they would surely die.
This is the conclusion. N■n■-■astra-prahara■■■ sarve yuddha-vi■■rad■■. No . . . not a single
person inexperienced was there. Yuddha-vi■■rad■■. Vi■■rada means very expert fighting. Still, they
would have to lay down their life, because it is K■■■a's plan that all these fighting men, they were not
ruling properly according to the tenets of Vedic injunctions. Therefore they were demons. Military
strength for self-aggrandizement is demonic. Military strength is required to rule over the kingdom, but
not to misuse them for aggression to others' country or others' kingdom. That was not allowed.
So when K■■■a appeared, there were many kings. Although they were under the ruling of the
P■■■avas, still, Hastin■pura, still they were fighting. That is natural. If one has no K■■■a
consciousness, then his strength and opulence would be misused. And if one is K■■■a conscious,
then he would use his strength and opulence very properly. So these kings were meant for giving
protection to the citizen, to train them to the Vedic conception of life. But they were not doing that.
Therefore they were demons.
Although they were k■atriyas, still . . . k■atriyas are meant for representing the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Actually, K■■■a is the proprietor. Sarva-loka-mahe■varam. Sarva-loka-mahe■varam,
suh■da■ sarva-bh■t■n■■ jñ■tv■ m■■ ■■ntim ■cchati (BG 5.29). So He is the proprietor.
Sarva-loka. Sarva-loka means all the planets, all the universes. Because they are created by K■■■a,
by K■■■a's bodily effulgence, brahma-jyotir. So they are created by K■■■a's . . . just like from the
sunshine these planets are created, similarly from brahma-jyotir, innumerable universes are created.
So it is all creation of K■■■a. Aha■ sarvasya prabhavo matta■ sarva■ pravartate (BG 10.8).
Everything has come out from K■■■a's body, external, therefore He is the proprietor. If I have created
something, then I am the proprietor. It is very easy to understand. In the Vedas also it is said, eko
n■r■ya■a ■s■t: "Before the creation only there was N■r■ya■a." In the catu■-■loki Bh■gavata also it
is said, aham ev■sam ev■gre (SB 2.9.33/34/35/36).
So before creation there was K■■■a. When we speak of K■■■a, it does not mean K■■■a was
alone. K■■■a means with His form, with His pastime, with His paraphernalia, with His entourage,
everything. When we speak of king, it does not mean king is alone. As soon as we speak of king, we
must understand the king, king's kingdom, king's secretaries, king's ministers, king's queen, king's
palace, so many things.
Similarly, when the Vedas says that eko n■r■ya■a ■s■t, "Before creation there was only N■r■ya■a,"
so N■r■ya■a with His paraphernalia, with His expansion. N■r■ya■a has expansion in the spiritual
world, vaiku■■ha jagat, innumerable Vaiku■■ha planets. You have seen the picture. Innumerable. We
have given only twenty-four names, but there are innumerable.
So actually, either in this material world or in the spiritual world, all planets, Vaiku■■ha planets or
ku■■ha planets . . . here in this material world, ku■■ha planets. Ku■■ha means anxiety. Here, in any
planet you go, the anxiety will be there. This is material. Sad■ samudvigna-dhiy■m asad-grah■t (SB
7.5.5). Why anxiety? Because we have accepted something asat, which will not stay. But we are
eternal. We want to stay. Our natural position is eternity, so we don't want this temporary body.
Therefore we try to save the body as much as possible. But it will not be saved, because we have
accepted something nonsense, which is not compatible with our existence.
The modern civilization, they do not know it. They think it that death is natural sequence; it cannot be
avoided. No. It can be avoided. It can be avoided. But these rascals, they do not know how to avoid it,
although it is mentioned in the Bhagavad-g■t■ how you can avoid death. Birth, death, old age and
disease, these are the problems. But they do not know how to solve these problems. They are simply
engaged in some temporary business.
And they are fighting, they are making plans, they are making diplomacy. But in the real problem they
do not touch, neither they know how to solve it. But this K■■■a consciousness movement can solve it.
These rascal may understand this fact, that this K■■■a consciousness movement is not a sentiment,
so-called religious movement. It is a scientific movement to solve all the problems of life. This is
K■■■a consciousness.
So in the Bhagavad-g■t■ it is said, tyaktv■ deha■ punar janma naiti m■m eti (BG 4.9). Punar janma
naiti. If you can avoid next birth . . . next birth means to accept another material body. Tath■
deh■ntara-pr■pti■, tath■ deh■ntara-pr■pti■ (BG 2.13). After giving up this body, we have to accept
another body. These rascals, they do not understand it. So many defects in the modern civilization, full
of ignorance, and still, they are passing as great scientist, great philosopher, great politicians. Real
knowledge they haven't got. So try to give them real knowledge. Tath■ deh■ntara-pr■pti■. This is the
crucial point, deh■ntara-pr■pti■. One has to accept another body.
So if you can find out a means so that you do not accept another body, then you are safe. Because as
soon as you accept another body, janma, birth, then where there is janma, there is m■tyu, death, also.
And between janma and m■tyu, birth and death, there is disease and old age. So K■■■a says that
tyaktv■ deha■ punar janma naiti (BG 4.9): "One can avoid accepting another material body." How?
Janma karma me divya■ yo j■n■ti tattvata■. Simply try to understand K■■■a, what is K■■■a, why
K■■■a appears, why K■■■a takes part in politics, why K■■■a . . . so many, K■■■a's activities.
So this is . . . our K■■■a consciousness movement means: try to understand K■■■a. Simply if you try
to understand . . . you cannot understand K■■■a fully. That is not possible. K■■■a is unlimited. But to
our limited knowledge, whatever is possible, that is stated in the Bhagavad-g■t■. As far as we can
understand about K■■■a, if we simply understand K■■■a, His transcendental nature, His
transcendental activities, divyam . . . janma karma me divyam (BG 4.9). Divyam means transcendental.
It is not ordinary. Tattvata■, in truth, in fact. Then you become free from this janma-m■tyu-jar■-vy■dhi
(BG 13.9). Very easy thing.
Therefore try to understand K■■■a. How you will understand K■■■a? K■■■a is so great.
Sevonmukhe hi jihv■dau svayam eva sphuraty ada■. Ata■ ■r■-k■■■a-n■m■di na bhaved gr■hyam
indriyai■ (CC Madhya 17.136). You cannot understand K■■■a by these blunt material senses. That is
not possible. You have to purify it. You have to purify it. Tat-paratvena nirmalam (CC Madhya 19.170).
Simply by K■■■a consciousness, always thinking of K■■■a, all your senses will be purified. This is
the process. Sevonmukhe hi jihv■dau. And you can begin service with your tongue.
Now, this is also very surprising. By utilizing our tongue, we can become perfect. This is also unknown
to the modern science. So utilizing the tongue, one can become perfect. Yes. This is the process. If by
the tongue you chant Hare K■■■a mantra, and by the tongue you taste pras■dam, you will be perfect,
simply by executing these two things. Do not accept anything, do not allow the tongue to touch anything
which is not offered to K■■■a. This is one item. And another item—engage the tongue always
chanting Hare K■■■a. You become perfect. Is it very difficult task? Anyone can do. Hare K■■■a
mah■-mantra, anyone can chant. And nice pras■dam, anyone can take. And actually, it is happening
so. How these European, American boys and girls, they are advancing, they are realizing? Simply by
that process, tongue: chant Hare K■■■a, take pras■dam.
So you can introduce this process all over the world. Give them chance to chant Hare K■■■a mantra.
But it is difficult also. There was a cartoon? That one . . .?
Ha■sad■ta: Hayagr■va?
Prabhup■da: No, no, that one old lady is requesting her husband, "Chant, chant, chant," and the
husband is replying, "Can't, can't, can't." (laughter). There was a cartoon. So we are requesting
everyone, "Please chant," and they are replying, "Can't." Still, they will not chant. This is the difficulty.
Otherwise, we can deliver all the people on this earth back to home, back to Godhead, simply by this
process: chant and take pras■dam. This should be . . .
Just like the other day we held the festival, Ratha-y■tr■. Chant and take pras■dam. That's all.
Organize this all over the world. They will be saved. They will understand K■■■a. Sevonmukhe hi
jihv■dau svayam . . . (Brs. 1.2.234). K■■■a will appear. K■■■a . . . you cannot see K■■■a. That is
not possible. You cannot order K■■■a, "Please come, I will see You." No. When He is pleased with
your service, He will come, "Yes, I am here. See Me." That is the history. Just like Dhruva Mah■r■ja.
Dhruva Mah■r■ja was meditating, and within six months he saw K■■■a face to face. So everyone
can see.
Everyone will be able, provided we utilize the tongue. Sevonmukhe hi jihv■dau. Jihv■dau. Jihv■dau
means "Beginning with the tongue." We have got senses, all senses—eyes, ears, touch—so many
senses. But begin with the sense, tongue. Try to control the tongue and engage in K■■■a's service.
Therefore Bhaktivinoda ■h■kura says, ■ar■ra abidy■-j■l, jo■endriya t■he k■l (Pras■da-sev■ya 1):
"This body is material body, and the senses are our greatest enemies," jo■endriya t■he k■l. "So out of
all the senses," t■'ra madhye jihw■ ati lobhamoy sudurmati, "of all the senses, the tongue is
formidable." It is sudurmati, it has no limit to taste. I have seen in Japan, twenty miles away they are
coming to taste some fried birds in the hotel. You see. They have got bus. The hotel has got their own
bus, and they bring customers from the city and they are coming after office hours just to taste some
jungle birds, fried. There is a hotel.
Devotee: Wild duck.
Prabhup■da: Maybe. Whatever it may be. You have tasted? (laughter) So the tongue is so formidable
enemy, simply for tasting, they will commit so many sinful activities. They will commit so many
abominable actions simply for tongue. And that is a straight line: tongue, then belly, then genital. So if
you can control the tongue, the other things will be controlled. Therefore, t■'ra madhye jihw■ ati
lobhamoy sudurmati. Lobhamoy: it is very greedy. And sudurmati: it is very difficult to control.
Just see. Simply for tongue, so many slaughterhouses are being maintained. I have seen. Those who
are meat-eaters . . . I have seen in the airplane, a small piece of meat they are eating; not very much.
But for these small pieces, so many population, huge quantity of slaughterhouse is being maintained.
They cannot give up that small piece of meat. What is the difficulty? They can make . . . the same thing
can be made by milk, milk product, ch■n■. What do you call curd?
Devotee: Cheese.
Prabhup■da: Cheese. You prepare cheese and fry it. You'll get the same taste. But let the animal live,
take its milk, and prepare so many milk preparation. But these rascals will not do. You kill simply for this
tongue. It is so strong, this tongue. They cannot give up this, I mean to say, formidable tongue. He is
demanding, "You must give me meat." So they are obliged. And for this obligation, they are committing
so much sinful activities, abominable activities, and becoming bound up by the laws of nature to accept
a body within the 8,400,000 species of life, and becoming the worm in the stool.
They do not know how the material law is working. Prak■te■ kriyam■■■ni gu■ai■ karm■■i
sarva■a■ (BG 3.27). Prak■ti, nature, is so strong. It is acting very nicely. So we have to become very
careful. That carefulness you cannot do any other way, especially in this age. Simply if you surrender to
K■■■a, if you become K■■■a conscious, K■■■a will take care of you, and you will be saved.
Thank you very much. (end)
