Pradyumna: O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo
bhagavate v■sudev■ya. (devotees repeat) (leads chanting of verse)
Prabhup■da: Next verse.
(leads chanting of synonyms)
arjuna■—Arjuna; uv■ca—said; d■■■v■—after seeing; imam—all these; svajanam—kinsmen;
k■■■a—O K■■■a; yuyutsum—all in fighting spirit; samupasthitam—all present; s■danti—quivering;
mama—my; g■tr■■i—limbs of the body; mukham—mouth; ca—also; pari■u■yati—drying up.
Translation: "Arjuna said: My dear K■■■a, seeing my friends and relatives present before me in such
a fighting spirit, I feel the limbs of my body quivering and my mouth drying up."
vepathu■—trembling of the body; ca—also; ■ar■re—on the body; me—my; roma-har■a■—standing
of hair on end; ca—also; j■yate—is taking place; g■■■■vam—the bow of Arjuna; sra■sate—is
slipping; hast■t—from the hands; tvak—skin; ca—also; eva—certainly; paridahyate—burning.
Translation: "My whole body is trembling, and my hair is standing on end. My bow G■■■■va is
slipping from my hand, and my skin is burning."
Prabhup■da: So d■■■v■ ima■ svajanam. Arjuna is a great warrior, fighter, and for a k■atriya, to kill
one is not very difficult task. The k■atriyas are trained up, hunting. Hunting is allowed for the k■atriyas.
Just like medical practitioners, they are trained up how to practice surgical operation on dead body. It is
not possible to, of course, for a gentleman, to push knife in someone's body. It is naturally very difficult
thing. Rogues and thieves, they can stab. So as the doctors, medical men, surgeons are trained up to
operate their knife on the dead body to see where are the nerves, similarly, k■atriyas are also allowed
for being trained how to kill.
K■atriya means . . . k■ata. K■ata means injury; and tra means tr■yate, saves. A k■atriya has to save
the citizen from being injured by others. He is called k■atriya. Br■hma■a means one who knows
Brahman, the supreme. So br■hma■a, k■atriya, vai■ya, ■■dra, these divisions are there according to
quality. Gu■a-karma-vibh■ga■a■ (BG 4.13). By gu■a. Gu■a means quality. And karma means actual
operation of the gu■a.
So Arjuna was a k■atriya, trained up by Dro■■c■rya how to kill. This is the . . . nonviolence is not the
business of the k■atriya. That is cowardice. They are taught how to become violent. Otherwise, they
cannot rule over. Formerly, the judgment was given by the king, immediately finished. Not go to the
court and wait for the judgment for ten years; in the meantime, everything is finished. Not like that.
Anything, there was regularly, the king used to sit in his assembly, and all the criminals, culprits, they
were judged by the king himself. Sometimes the king had to kill personally with the sword. Even in
European countries, the royal orders were trained up.
Nowadays it is constitutional, democratic government. The king has no power. But this is not good for
the people. The democracy is a farce. At least, I do not like it. Because so many rascals, simply by
getting votes, go to the government, and what do they know how to rule over? Therefore, at the present
moment, all over the world there is no good government. There is no good government. The America
was considered to have very good government. Now we can see the behavior of Mr. Nixon. It is not
possible.
Formerly the k■atriyas, they were trained up how to govern. They were trained up by military men, just
like Dro■■c■rya trained Arjuna, Duryodhana. All the royal princes were trained up how to kill. Not only
killing—also, according to ■■stra, how to rule over. The king's business is to see that everyone in the
country, they are properly employed and engaged in his own business. That is king's business. There
was no question of unemployment. This is government's first business.
Because if a person is unemployed, then the devil's workshop. Devil's work . . . if he hasn't got to do
anything . . . that is being done now. Rich man's son, he hasn't got to do anything, so his brain is devil's
workshop. They are manufacturing so many "isms." But everyone should be engaged. This is
government's first business to see—a br■hma■a is engaged as a br■hma■a, a k■atriya is engaged
as k■atriya.
So Arjuna was not a coward. He was a competent warrior. But still, deh■tma-buddhi, the bodily
concept of life is so strong that Arjuna admits, d■■■v■ tu svajana■ k■■■a (BG 1.28): "My dear
K■■■a, I have to kill my own men." What is that "own men"? "Own men" means this bodily
relationship. Why others are not own men? Everyone is own men, because everyone is K■■■a's son.
So when one becomes K■■■a conscious, he can see everyone own men. And when he is not K■■■a
conscious, he simply sees own men where there is bodily relationship. This is the defect. They are
advertising humanitarian work, philanthropic work, Communism, this "ism," but when there is question
of bodily relationship, immediately everything is changed.
You know, the Communist country, the Khrushchev was driven out because he was patronizing his own
men. That was the defect. So you can advertise that, "I am for everyone," but there is affection for own
men. Nepotism. Nepotism. It's called nepotism. So many big, big leaders. Our Jawaharlal Nehru, he
was sending his own men as ambassador. Vijaya Lakshmi, a woman, she was being sent as
ambassador. She was high commissioner here. So this "own men" question is very prominent
everywhere.
So Arjuna is a great warrior. He could fight all the soldiers, all the fighting men, yuyutsu. The other
party, they were also, they were assembled, yuyutsu, with fighting spirit. Other men, even they are not
fighting spirit, we can kill very easily. But own men, although they are fighting spirit, still he hesitates,
because own men. So this "own-menship," in relationship with the body, is the barrier for spiritual
understanding.
So long this conception of life will exist that, "I am this body, and anyone who is related with this body,
they are my own men, kinsmen, relative . . ." This conception of life is the greatest barrier for advancing
in spiritual consciousness. Therefore the Vedic civilization is so planned that one has to give up this
rascal "own men" conception. That is the vair■gya. It is called vair■gya. Jñ■na-vair■gya.
Two things required in human life: knowledge and vair■gya, detachment. The attachment increases.
First of all it increases, pu■sa■ striy■ mithun■-bh■vam etam (SB 5.5.8). This whole world is based on
sex life. A man has got attraction for woman; a woman has got attraction for man. This is nature's
bondage, shackle. And when they are actually united, either by the father, mother, or by their own way,
that shackle, that attraction, increases. Pu■sa■ striy■ mithun■-bh■vam eta■ tayor mitho
h■daya-granthi ■hu■. H■daya-granthi, knot in the heart. "She is my wife," "He is my husband."
Of course, now that knot is very slack. Formerly it was very strong, because the woman was not
allowed to mix with any other man, and the man was also not allowed with any other woman. This
intermingling has slackened even that knot, h■daya-granthim. Therefore, even trifle cases, quarrel
between husband and wife, there is divorce. Because that unity is not very strong now. That is good.
Some way or other, it is slackened. So this "own-menship" comes from bodily concept of life.
So Arjuna is preparing the ground, how to receive the instruction of Bhagavad-g■t■. Because spiritual
instruction will begin to separate the soul from the body. Unless one understands that there is a soul
different from this body, there is no spiritual education. This is the basic principle. If you do not
understand what is soul, what is spirit soul, then where is spiritual education? So Arjuna was affected.
He says frankly, d■■■v■ tu svajana■ k■■■a yuyutsu■ samupasthitam: "What is this? I have to kill
my own men?" Svajanam. Svajanam means own men. "No, no." S■danti mama g■tr■■i: "Oh, I am
shivering." Mukha■ ca pari■u■yati: "My mouth is being dried up." We have got this experience. When
there is danger, these things happens, so many symptoms.
As these things, these symptoms, different transformations of bodily constitution, appears in times of
danger, similarly, such symptoms appear in times of spiritual bliss. That is called a■■a-s■ttvika-vik■ra
(CC Antya 14.99), eight kinds of transformation of the body. So there is so many reserve energies
within our body. They become manifest in due course of time when the mind and intelligence work in
different way. This is the study, how things appear. It is appearing from intelligence, mind. The soul is
there, and the intelligence and mind creating the situation of the bodily symptoms.
Therefore body or the senses are not all. The modern education, they think this body is everything. No.
Real study is body means the senses. Indriy■■i par■■y ■hu■. On gross vision we see this body.
Indriy■■i par■■y ■hur indriyas tu para■ mana■ (BG 3.42). But the bodily symptoms are acting
because the mind is there. And mind is working because the intelligence is there. And the intelligence is
working because the soul is there.
(aside) You can stand.
So this is the process. The basic principle is the soul. The soul is acting through intelligence, and the
intelligence is acting through mind, and the mind is expressed through the senses. This is the position.
So as my mind is absorbed in something, some subject matter, my bodily symptoms also will work, or
the senses will work according to that mind. Therefore for spiritual advancement also, you have to train
your mind. Sa vai mana■ k■■■a-pad■ravindayor vac■■si vaiku■■ha-gu■■nuvar■ane (SB 9.4.18).
If you use . . .
First of all fix up your mind. yoga, yoga means indriya-sa■yama. yoga practice means that controlling
the mind and the senses. That is yoga practice. Because our mind is very flickering and changing,
something accepting immediately, something rejecting immediately, very flickering. Therefore we have
to train up the mind, and when the mind is trained up, then automatically your senses will be controlled.
If you are strong-minded that, "I will not accept any foodstuff which is not offered to K■■■a," naturally
your tongue is controlled. Naturally.
Bhaktivinoda ■h■kura has sung, ■ar■ra avidy■-j■l ja■endriya t■he k■l j■ve phele vi■aya-s■gare
(Pras■da-sev■ya I). Our this body is a network of nescience, or ignorance. This body, why we have
got this body, material body? Because we have forgotten K■■■a and we wanted to lord it over the
material nature. This is our position. Therefore, according to our different desires, we have got different
body. Here we are sitting, say fifty or hundred men. Nobody's body will tally with other's body. Face and
everything, different.
Because every one of us has got different desires. Therefore their facial expression, bodily
construction, everything is made according to the mind. So at the time of death also, the constitution of
mind will transfer me to another, different type of body. The mind will carry the soul. These are all
explained in the Bhagavad-g■t■. Ya■ ya■ v■pi smaran loke tyajaty ante kalevaram (BG 8.6).
So if you train up your mind, that is K■■■a consciousness—always remembering K■■■a. Hare
K■■■a, Hare K■■■a, Hare K■■■a, K■■■a K■■■a, Hare Hare. Then it may be possible that at the
time of death you remember K■■■a and your life is successful. Tyaktv■ deha■ punar janma naiti
m■m eti kaunteya (BG 4.9). Immediately you are transferred to K■■■aloka. This is training.
So we have to think of K■■■a always, twenty-four hours. K■rtan■ya■ sad■ hari■, Caitanya
Mah■prabhu has recommended. Taror api sahi■■un■ . . .
Because our aim is . . . if we are serious of being transferred to the loka, to the place, where K■■■a is,
then we have to train up the mind so nicely that at the time of death I can remember K■■■a.
Therefore one great king, Kula■ekhara, he is praying to K■■■a, k■■■a tvad■ya pada-pa■kaja . . .
what is that verse? Tvad■ya . . . k■■■a tvad■ya pada-pa■kaja. I am just forgetting. The idea is,
Kula■ekhara, King Kula■ekhara is praying to K■■■a, adyaiva vi■atu me m■nasa-r■ja-ha■sa■.
Adyaiva. Pr■■a-pray■■a-samaye kapha-v■ta-pittai■ smara■a■ kutas te. He is praying, "K■■■a, I
am now in good health. So kindly award me death immediately." Adyaiva, "Immediately, so that my
mind, who is just like a swan, he can take pleasure by entering into stem of Your lotus flower feet."
K■■■a's feet is always compared with lotus flower, and the lotus flower has got a stem. And the
swans, they take pleasure being entangled with that stem. They go and dive into the water. This is their
very good sporting. So he is taking that sporting; he is comparing his mind as the r■ja-ha■sa, "So as
the r■ja-ha■sa takes pleasure by entangling him in the stem of the lotus flower, similarly Your lotus
feet, there is a stem. So my mind, which may be compared with r■ja-ha■sa, let it be entangled now,
immediately. Otherwise I do not know." Pr■■a-pray■■a-samaye kapha-v■ta-pittai■: "When
everything bodily function will be mixed up," kapha-v■ta-pittai■, "ghahn-ghahn," there will be some
sound, "how I will be able to remembering Your lotus feet? So let me die immediately, immediately.
Now I am quite fit. Otherwise I may not be able."
This is the point. The mind should be kept in healthy condition. Sa■jñ■. Therefore one who dies with
full sense remembering K■■■a, oh, he is successful. In Bengali it is said, bhajana kara s■dhana kara
m■rti y■■re haya. Means you may be very great devotee. That's all right. But it will be tested at the
time of your death how you remember K■■■a. That will be the test examination. At the time of death, if
we forget, if we become parrotlike . . . just like parrot, he chants also, "Hare K■■■a, Hare K■■■a,
Hare K■■■a." But when the cat catches the neck, "Tyanh! Tyanh! Tyanh! Tyanh!" No more K■■■a.
No more K■■■a. So artificial practice will not help us. Then "Tyanh, tyhanh." That kapha-pitta-v■tai■,
ka■■h■varodhana-vidhau smara■a■ kutas te (MM 33).
So from the very beginning we have to practice K■■■a consciousness if we are actually serious to go
back to home, back to Godhead. Not that let it be left for two or three years before death. Oh, it is not so
easy. It is not so easy. Prahl■da Mah■r■ja recommends, therefore:
He was five years old, K■■■a conscious from the womb of his mother. He heard instruction of
N■rada. N■rada was instructing his mother. He was in the womb. Fortunately, by God's grace, he
heard all the instruction of N■rada when he was in the womb of his mother. And the result was, from
the beginning of his life he is K■■■a conscious. From the beginning. As soon as he took birth, he was
K■■■a conscious. So he was advising his class friends, preaching. Just see. He was five-years-old
boy, but he was taking the opportunity of preaching. Because the teacher, he is born of demon family.
So all those class friends, they were also sons of demons. So there is no question of K■■■a
consciousness. But he learned K■■■a consciousness from the womb of his mother. So he was trying
to preach. Because he was king's son, there was no other opportunity for preaching, and he was a
five-years-old boy, he took the opportunity in the classroom. As soon as the teacher is away, he would
preach. He would preach.
This is preaching spirit. As soon as you get some opportunity, preach. What is that preach? Preaching,
Caitanya Mah■prabhu has advised us, y■re dekha t■re kaha k■■■a-upade■a (CC Madhya 7.128).
This is preaching, "Whoever you meet, simply speak of the instruction of K■■■a." So if you are
advanced, if you know what is the instruction of K■■■a by reading Bhagavad-g■t■, you can preach to
others. And if you have not read anything, suppose you do not know anything, then you can also
preach. What is that? "Just become a devotee of K■■■a, my dear sir." That's all. This is also
preaching, "Just surrender to K■■■a." You go door to door. If you cannot do anything, simply say: "My
dear sir, you are very good man. Oh, you are very intelligent man. Chant Hare K■■■a." Sakalam eva
vih■ya d■r■t.
This preaching was taught by Prabodh■nanda Sarasvat■. Dante nidh■ya t■■aka■ padayor nipatya
k■ku-■ata■ k■tv■ ca aha■ brav■mi. This is the preaching process. Dante nidh■ya t■■akam.
According to Vedic civilization, if one wants to become very humble and approach another person, then
he has to take one straw in the mouth. T■■a. So the preaching process is to take a straw in the mouth,
dante nidh■ya t■■aka■ padayor nipatya (Caitanya-candr■m■ta 90), and falling down on your feet,
dante nidh■ya t■■aka■ padayor, k■ku-■ata■ k■tv■ ca aha■ brav■mi, and flattering you, "Sir, you
are so great man, you are so intelligent man." This is flattering. Although he is fool number one, we
have to flatter like that, "Oh, there is no greater man like you. You are so intelligent, you are so rich, you
are so beautiful." So all these things. Just like the beggars. Sometimes, "You become king." And one
thinks, "Oh, he is blessing me. All right, you take one paisa."
So this flattering is also required. So k■ku-■ata■ k■tv■ c■ha■ brav■mi. So the man may ask that,
"Why you are so humble and flattering? What is your intention? Tell me." So he is now telling. He
s■dhava■, "Oh, you are great s■dhu." He s■dhava■, sakalam eva vih■ya d■r■t: "You have learned
so many nice things. I know that. But kick them out, please." Sakalam eva. "Whatever you have
nonsense learned, rascaldom you have learned, please kick them out. This is my request." Sakalam
eva vih■ya d■r■t caitanya-candra-cara■e kurut■nur■gam. "Just hear what ■r■ Caitanya
Mah■prabhu says. This is my request." This is preaching.
This is preaching. Flatter, fall down on his feet, and eulogize him as great s■dhu, as great intelligent,
great rich. Do, so that he may little hear. And when he says: "What do you want?" "Now, I want this, sir.
Whatever rascaldom you have learned, please forget. Because I know you are rascal number one.
(laughter) You have got so many hodge-podge thing in your brain. So you kick them out, please."
Sakalam eva vih■ya d■r■t. "Kick them, throw away, long distance. Don't look upon them." "Then what
to do?" Caitanya-candra-cara■e kurut■nur■gam: "Please hear what Caitanya-candra says."
Caitanya-day■ karaha vic■ra, vic■ra karile citte p■be camatk■ra (CC Adi 8.15): "Just try to
understand the mercy of ■r■ Caitanya Mah■prabhu, and you will feel so sublime."
Caitanya-candra-day■ karaha. "Don't take it blindly. If you are intelligent, just make a judgment, what
Caitanya-candra is." Tell him. So this is preaching. This is preaching.
So Arjuna has to be a preacher, practical preacher. What is that preaching? That he has to sacrifice
everything for K■■■a's sake. That's all. This is preaching. Sakalam eva vih■ya d■r■t. Arjuna will be
the greatest example, how he became K■■■a conscious, in the last, Tenth Chapter. He will say,
sarvam etad ■ta■ manye yad vadasi ke■ava (BG 10.14): "My dear K■■■a, Ke■ava, whatever You
say, I accept in toto," without any interpretation, or "This is like this, this is like that, this is not very
good." Ardha-kukku■■-ny■ya (CC Adi 5.176). All rascals, they accept this Bhagavad-g■t■ on the
principle of ardha-kukku■■-ny■ya.
In the ny■ya, in the logic, there is a logic, ardha-kukku■■-ny■ya. What is that ardha-kukku■■-ny■ya?
Kukku■■ means the hen. So hen gives one egg every day. So the man, proprietor of the hen, he is
considering that "This hen is very good, giving every day one egg. But the . . . it's mouth is expensive. It
eats. So let me cut the mouth, simply take the egg." So there are rascals, they study Bhagavad-g■t■
on this principle of ardha-kukku■■-ny■ya. "Cut this, take this; cut this, take this." So if you cut the
head, there will be no more egg. The rascal does not know. If you cut the head there will be no more
production of egg. So similarly, if you try to study Bhagavad-g■t■ according to your whims—cut this
and take this— that is not study of Bhagavad-g■t■. That is something else. That is something else.
That is something else.
Therefore we have to take from Arjuna how he accepted Bhagavad-g■t■. He said, sarvam etad ■ta■
manye (BG 10.14): "K■■■a, You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Whatever You are
speaking, whatever You have spoken, I take them as it is." This is study of Bhagavad-g■t■. So the
hindrance is this svajanam. Now he is presenting. He is presenting himself as fool number one,
although he is not so. But he is creating the ground for K■■■a's speaking on Bhagavad-g■t■. This is
the principle. Therefore he is not at all affected by the svajanam, but he is presenting, "This is my
problem, that I have to kill . . ." D■■■v■ ima■ svajana■ k■■■a. "By seeing my own kinsmen,
because I am fool number one . . ." Yasy■tma-buddhi■ ku■ape tridh■tuke (SB 10.84.13).
I am calling them svajana. In ■■stra it is called svajan■khya-dasyu. Svajan■khya-dasyu. "They are all
thieves and rogues, but they are claiming as my kinsmen." Suppose in your pocket there is one
hundred dollars. If some pickpocket takes it and if you capture him, then you give him immediately to
the police. And when you come home after hard-earned money, and when your wife takes away, oh,
you laugh, "Oh, you have taken all my money! Ahhhhh!" But the same pickpocket, but the same
pickpocket, but because he's svajan■khya-dasyu, "pickpocket in the name of svajana," he is very much
pleased, "Oh, my wife has taken, my son has taken. Never mind." That's all. And others? As soon as
takes, he, "Give him to the police." The same business is being done. He is working hard day and night,
and they are plundering. Still, they are thinking, "They are my svajanam, they are my kinsmen." This is
called illusion.
Thank you very much.
Devotees: Haribol . . . (cut) (end)
