Pradyumna: O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo
bhagavate v■sudev■ya. (Prabhup■da and devotees repeat)
Prabhup■da: That's alright.
Pradyumna: tatra—there; apa■yat—he could see; sthit■n—standing; p■rtha■—Arjuna;
pit■n—fathers; atha—also; pit■mah■n—grandfathers; ■c■ry■n—teachers; m■tul■n—maternal
uncles; bhr■t■n—brothers; putr■n—sons ; pautr■n—grandsons; sakh■n—friends; tath■—too,
■va■ur■n—fathers-in-law; suh■da■—wellwishers; ca—also; eva—certainly; senayo■—of the armies;
ubhayo■—of both parties; api—including.
Translation: "There Arjuna could see, within the midst of the armies of both parties, his fathers,
grandfathers, teachers, maternal uncles, brothers, sons, grandsons, friends, and also his father-in-law
and well-wishers—all present there."
(leads chanting of synonyms) (break)
t■n—all of them; sam■k■ya—after seeing; sa■—he; kaunteya■—the son of Kunt■; sarv■n—all kinds
of; bandh■n—relatives; avasthit■n—situated; k■pay■—by compassion; paray■—of a high grade;
■vi■■a■—overwhelmed by; vi■■dan—while lamenting; idam—thus; abrav■t—spoke.
Translation: "When the son of Kunt■, Arjuna, saw all these different grades of friends and relatives, he
became overwhelmed with compassion and spoke thus."
Prabhup■da: Hm. This is the problem. Now Arjuna is facing the problem. What is this problem?
Suppose you bring all my friends, my relatives, my sons, grandsons, my father-in-law, brother-in-law,
friends, my animals . . . because there were soldiers, senayor ubhayor api, there were animals
also—horses, elephants. They are also within the membership. According to Vedic conception, the
animals, they are also members of your family, because they are giving service.
Not that one section of the members of my family I give protection, and the other section, I take
everything from them and then cut throat. This is not civilization. You keep your sons, wife, daughters,
cows, dogs— they are animals—asses, domestic animals, horses, elephants. If you are rich, you can
keep elephants also. It does not mean . . . either family-wise or state-wise, it does not mean that you
give protection to some members and cut throat of the others. Oh, how horrible it is. So all of them were
present now. And the problem is that he has to kill them, Arjuna. It is fight; it is a family fight.
So some of the family members on the other side, and some of the family members this side. So other
side also, what are they? Tatr■pa■yat sthit■n p■rtha■ pit■n atha pit■mah■n (BG 1.26). Pit■n,
teachers, and pit■n, also, pit■n means those who are on the status of father. And Bh■■madeva was a
grandfather, a real grandfather, pit■mah■. He is on the other side. Dro■■c■rya, he is on the other
side, teacher. They had to be respected. Actually Arjuna did so. Before fighting with Dro■■c■rya, he
first of all throw one arrow on his lotus feet, obeisances.
This is the etiquette, "My dear sir, you have taught me this fighting science, now it is being used against
you, duty. So I offer my obeisances." And Dro■■c■rya also threw another arrow, touching his head,
"My dear boy, become blessed." This is duty. How blessed? "By killing me. I know you will kill me, so I
give you blessings that you kill me." This is duty. The disciple is fighting, touching the feet of
Dro■■c■rya, "My dear sir, it is duty. Now we are face to face to fight. So give me your blessing." This
is one side. The other side, blessing, "Yes, you have my all blessings."
So this is the problem. This material world is problematic, especially when we have got these family
relationship. "Society, friendship and love, divinely bestowed upon man," they say. (laughs) It is not
divinely bestowed. It is not. It is entanglement. It is entanglement. Deh■patya. There is verse in the
Second Canto of ■r■mad-Bh■gavatam, deh■patya . . . what is that verse?
Devotee: Deh■patya-kalatr■di.
Prabhup■da: Deh■patya-kalatr■di (SB 2.1.4). Deha, first affection, is with our body. "I am this Mr.
Such-and-such. This is I am, this body." I have got attraction for this body. Then the offsprings, the
by-products of this body. Apatya. Apatya means children. And how this by-product is made? Kalatra,
through wife. Str■. Str■ means which expands. Vistara, expands. I am alone. I accept wife, str■, and
with her cooperation I expand. So one who helps me to expand, that is called str■. Every Sanskrit word
has got meaning.
Why woman is called str■? Because she helps, expanding myself. How expanding?
Deh■patya-kalatr■di■u (SB 2.1.4). I get my children. First of all I was affectionate to my body. Then,
as soon as I get a wife, I become affectionate to her. Then, as soon as I get children, I become
affectionate to children. In this way I expand my affection for this material world. This material world,
attachment. It is not required. It is a foreign thing. This material body is foreign. I am spiritual. I am
spiritual, aha■ brahm■smi. But because I wanted to lord it over the material nature, K■■■a has given
me this body. Daiva-netre■a (SB 3.31.1). He is giving you body. He is giving the body of Brahm■, He
is giving you the body of ant—as you desire. As you desire.
If you want the body of a tiger, K■■■a will give you. If you want the body of a hog, He will give you. If
you want the body of Brahm■, He will give you. If you want the body of a demigod, He will give you. If
you want the body of American, He will give you. Englishman, He will give you. Indian, He will give you.
That is K■■■a. He is so kind. Ye yath■ m■■ prapadyante t■■s tathaiva bhaj■my aham (BG 4.11).
K■■■a is very kind. Just like a son disobedient to the father, but he wants to enjoy something. Still,
father giving him, "All right, you take money and enjoy." Father is so kind. "You become free. Whatever
you like, you can do. You take some money."
This is our concession. This material life is a concession to us, given by God, for gratifying our senses.
This is material life. K■■■a does not want that you become entangled in this material world. That He
doesn't want. Why He should want? K■■■a . . . just like you produce your sons, children. Why? To
remain in household life, enjoy in the company of wife, children, friends. This is . . . one can understand.
Why I take so much responsibility of family? I was alone. Why I get married? Why I beget children?
Why I make friends? Because I want to enjoy.
So K■■■a is also a person. Nityo nity■n■■ cetana■ cetan■n■m (Ka■ha Upani■ad 2.2.13). He has
produced so many children, these living entities. Why? To enjoy along with them. Just try to understand
the psychology. Yato v■ im■ni bh■t■ni jayante (Taittir■ya Upani■ad 3.1), janm■dy asya yata■ (SB
1.1.1). Where this idea came from that, "I shall be happy within society, friendship and love, children"?
Wherefrom this idea came? Where is the origin? The origin is there in K■■■a. Janm■dy asya yata■.
Janm■dy asya yata■, the origin of love. Just like K■■■a is loving R■dh■r■■■. So the loving idea
came from K■■■a. Anything that is within our experience, that is in K■■■a.
So K■■■a cannot be impersonal. That is nonsense. K■■■a is exactly a person like me, you, but the
difference is that He's very, very, unlimitedly powerful; I am limited. This is the difference. So K■■■a
also wants that to live with His family. Our K■■■a consciousness movement is just to train ourselves
again to enter into the family of K■■■a. This is our movement. With these families, the so-called
families, we are suffering. We are suffering. But this family idea is there. That is perfect in K■■■a, with
K■■■a. The family idea, wherefrom family idea comes without it is being situated in K■■■a? Because
nothing can be visible without being in K■■■a. He is the origin. Janm■dy asya yata■ (SB 1.1.1).
Aha■ sarvasya prabhava■ (BG 10.8): "I am the origin of everything."
So whatever we are seeing in this material world, the origin is in K■■■a. But here it is perverted. That
is the only difference. Just like a tree. The original tree is standing erect. But when you see the
perverted reflection of the tree, everything is topsy-turvied. The upside has gone downside. You have
seen the reflection of the tree. So the upside, downside. When the upside of the tree becomes
downside, that is called perverted reflection. So this material world is perverted reflection of the spiritual
world. It is false in this sense: because it is reflection.
Otherwise, exactly the same thing are there in the spiritual world. ■rdhva-m■lam adhah-■■kham
a■vattha■ avyayam vidhu (BG 15.1), there is. In the Bhagavad-g■t■ you will find in the Fifteenth
Chapter. ■rdhva-m■lam. Here, this material world, the origin—m■lam means root—is upside. Upside.
Because it is reflection. This tree is erect, and this is reflection. So the root has gone upside.
So here is the problem. Because we are attached to our this so-called family, society, friendship and
love . . . when Arjuna was faced, then he became k■pay■ paray■vi■■o vi■■dann idam abrav■t (BG
1.27). "How it is possible, K■■■a, that I have to kill the other side—my fathers, my father-in-law, my
grandfather, my sons, my grandsons, my brother, my so many friends?" So it is natural. K■pay■
paray■ ■vi■■a■. He becomes overwhelmed with compassion. K■pay■ paray■vi■■o vi■■dan, very
morosely, "Oh, K■■■a, I will have to fight with them. I will have to kill them." Why this consciousness
came? The other side also, Duryodhana, why he did not think in that way? Why Arjuna is thinking?
Because he is devotee. That is the difference.
A devotee thinks like that. A devotee does not like to kill anyone, even an ant. Why he should be
encouraged to kill his friends? A devotee is like that. Yasy■sti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcan■ sarvair
gu■ais tatra sam■sate sur■■ (SB 5.18.12). This is the result of devotional life. Arjuna was insulted.
Arjuna was taken away all his belongings. Arjuna was banished for thirteen years. His wife was
insulted. So many atrocities was done to him. Still, when the question of killing came, he was not very
happy: "No." This is Vai■■ava. This is Vai■■ava. He is ready to excuse even the greatest enemy. But
K■■■a does not want. If you insult His devotee, the devotee may excuse, but K■■■a will not excuse.
This is K■■■a's position.
Therefore, be careful to insult a devotee. A devotee may excuse you, but K■■■a will not excuse you.
K■■■a is so strict. He cannot tolerate any insult to His devotee. Therefore this arrangement of fighting.
Arjuna wanted, "No, let them be excused." K■■■a wanted, "No, you must fight. You must kill them."
This is the position. So he is within the dilemma. K■■■a is insisting that, "You must fight and kill them,"
but he is thinking, "How shall I kill my kinsmen?" This is the problem. Therefore, t■n sam■k■ya sa
kaunteya■ sarv■n bandh■n avasthit■n (BG 1.27). All friends are there. K■pay■ paray■vi■■o
vi■■dann idam abrav■t. So this is one side, that if you want to please K■■■a, then you have to be
prepared for killing your so-called relatives. If you want K■■■a. If you want to please K■■■a.
So this whole Vedic civilization is made just to train how you can be detached from this so-called family
affection. This is Vedic training. First of all brahmac■r■. Brahmac■r■ means to lead the life of
austerity. A brahmac■r■ is supposed to live to serve the spiritual master at his home, and he has to
work just like a menial. He may be a king's son or a very great br■hma■a's son, but as soon as he
agrees to live with the spiritual master, he has to live just like a menial servant. Whatever the spiritual
master will order, he has to do it. This is brahmac■r■. And they will gladly do, because they are
children.
Brahmac■r■ life begins from five years. So you ask any child do anything, he will do. They are learned.
They are given education, "Go from door to door, house to house, and bring some alms." So
brahmac■r■ means the neighborhood, their sons. So when the brahmac■r■ goes for begging,
"Mother, give me something, alms," so immediately, some rice, some ■■l, some ■■■■ is given, or
some vegetables, sometimes some money. So they bring everything to the spiritual master, and it
becomes the property of the spiritual master. Because he has begged, it is not his property. Sarvasva■
guru-veditam.
Everything is guru's property. So much so that after cooking everything, the spiritual master will call,
"My dear boys, come on. Take pras■dam." But if he forgets to call somebody, he will not touch. He will
not touch. This is brahmac■r■. "Oh, spiritual master has not called me, so I will fast." (laughter) He
begged the rice and vegetables and ■■■■ and ■■l. It is cooked. But when it is cooked, that is also
spiritual master's property. If the spiritual master does not ask him to take, he cannot take. He cannot
touch. This is brahmac■r■ life.
So therefore the first training is given to become austere, tolerate, how to tolerate, how to call other
women as "mother." He is learning from the beginning, a small child. He is trained up to call any
woman, even of his own age, not "sister"—"mother." This is the training. M■t■vat para-d■re■u. This is
education. M■t■vat para-d■re■u. C■■akya Pa■■ita, the great politician, has given the definition of a
learned scholar. Who is learned scholar? He has given the definition. What is this? M■t■vat
para-d■re■u: to see every woman except his wife as mother. This is education. This is education,
perfection of education, when you can see all women except your wife as mother. This is education.
M■t■vat para-d■re■u para-dravye■u lo■■ravat: and others' property, just like garbage in the street.
Nobody is interested in the garbage. You throw. That is education. And ■tmavat sarva-bh■te■u: and
thinking all living entities as your own self. If you feel pains and pleasure by something, you could not
afflict the pains to others. If your throat is cut, if your head is cut, you feel so much pain, how you can
cut the head of another animal? This is education. Sama■ sarve■u-bh■te■u. This is education, three
things. This is the test of education.
Where is? Where is that pa■■ita? There is no such thing now.
So this problem, attachment for this material world, gradually we have to cut it. That is the Vedic
civilization. If you want to go back to home, back to Godhead, then at the same time, if you remain
attached to this material world, so-called society, friendship and love, then it is not possible. So long
you will have a pinch of attraction with this material world, there is no possibility of being transferred to
the spiritual world. This is the position.
Therefore by training, by education, we have to become detached. Detached, this society, friendship
and love. We have to understand the falsity of this so-called society, friendship and love. It is just like . .
. because we are being carried away by the waves of m■y■. Bhaktivinoda ■h■kura has sung, m■y■r
bo■e, j■ccho bhese, kh■ccho h■bu■ubu bh■i. Just like we see sometimes in rainy season, so many
plants and creepers and vegetable and so many other things are floating in the river, going. Similarly,
we also are all floating in the waves of m■y■. M■y■r bo■e, j■ccho bhese, kh■ccho h■bu■ubu.
Sometimes drowned, sometimes on the surface, sometimes on the other shore, sometimes on this
shore. This is going on.
So long we are in this material world, we are being tossed by different currents, and sometimes I am
here as the master of some kingdom, and sometimes I am dog of somebody else. This is my position.
The same thing, very good example, that we are being carried away by the waves of m■y■.
Sometimes we are gathering together. So many straws and vegetables, they gather together. And
sometimes the same vegetable and straws are thrown asunder—one is there, one is here.
So here also, we assemble here as society, friendship and love exactly like that, in the waves of m■y■.
Then nobody is your father, nobody is your mother, nobody is your sister, nobody . . . it is simply m■yic,
illusory combination. Illusory combination, temporary combination. And we are so much attached to this
combination that we are refusing to go back to home, back to Godhead. This is our position.
Therefore we have to meet them in the battlefield of Kuruk■etra, and if required, we have to kill them
and execute the order of K■■■a. This is our position. If we are thinking that, "In this material existence
I shall be safe, assisted by my society, friendship, love, country, and politics and sociology," "No, no,
sir, it is not possible." It is not possible. You have to take care of yourself. Your so-called society,
friendship, love, country, nation and this, never will be able to help you. Because you are under the
clutches of m■y■. Daiv■ hy e■■ gu■amay■ mama m■y■ duratyay■ (BG 7.14).
You are under the clutches of m■y■. You have no independence. Neither anyone has got any
independence to save you. That is not possible. The same example as I gave sometime, that you learn
how to drive aeroplane. So you go high in the sky. But if you are in danger, no other aeroplane can help
you. You are finished. Therefore you must be a very careful pilot to take care of yourself.
Similarly, in this material world everyone individually has to take care of himself, how he can be saved
from the clutches of m■y■. That is K■■■a consciousness movement. A teacher can give you hints.
The ■c■rya can give you hints that, "You can be saved in this way." But the execution of the duties,
that is in your hand. If you perform the spiritual duties rightly, then you are saved. Otherwise, even
■c■rya gives you instruction, if you don't follow, so how he can save you? He can save you by
instruction, by his mercy, as much as possible. But you have to take it in your hands seriously.
So this problem is . . . Arjuna is facing now this problem. That is general problem.
Deh■patya-kalatr■di■u. Deh■patya. Deha means this body. Apatya means children. Kalatra means
wife. Deh■patya-kalatr■di■v ■tma-sainye■v asatsv api (SB 2.1.4). We are thinking that, "We shall be
protected by my these soldiers. I have got my sons, grandsons, my grandfather, my father-in-law, my
brother-in-law, my so many society, friendship and love." Everyone is thinking like that, "My nation, my
community, my philosophy, my politics." No. Nothing can save you. Deh■patya-kalatr■di■u asatsu api.
They are all temporary. They come and go. Asatsu api.
Pramatto tasya nidhana■ pa■yann api na pa■yati. One who is too much attached to this society,
friendship and love, he is pramatta. Pramatta means crazy, madman. Pa■yann api na, tasya
nidhanam. He does not see. Although he is seeing that, "My father has died. When I was a child, my
father was giving me protection. Now my father has gone away. Who is giving me protection? Is my
father alive to give me protection? Who is giving me protection? My mother was giving me protection.
Now who is giving me protection? I was in family, my sons, my daughters, my wife, but I left them. Now
who is giving me protection?"
And actually K■■■a gives you protection always. Not your society, friendship and love. They will be
finished. As your father is finished, as your grandfather is finished, similarly, your son, grandson will be
finished. None of them will be able to give you protection. Only K■■■a will be giving you protection.
Therefore you surrender to K■■■a. Sarva-dharm■n parityajya m■m eka■ ■ara■a■ vraja, aha■
tv■■ sarva-p■pebhyo mok■a . . . (BG 18.66): "I shall give you protection."
Kaunteya pratij■n■hi na me bhakta■ pra■a■yati (BG 9.31): "My devotee is never vanquished." So the
best thing is to take to K■■■a consciousness, fully surrender unto Him, and you will be protected.
Otherwise, there is no other way of being protected. We'll be carried away by the waves of m■y■. This
is the position.
Thank you very much. Hare K■■■a.
Devotees: Haribol. All glories to ■r■la Prabhup■da . . . (cut) (end)
