Pradyumna: O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. (devotees repeat) (leads chanting of verse)
(break)
tata■—thereafter; ■a■kh■■—conchshells; ca—also; bherya■—bugles; ca—and;
pa■ava-■naka—trumpets and drums; go-mukh■■—horns; sahas■—all of a sudden; eva—certainly;
abhyahanyanta—being simultaneously sounded; sa■—that; ■abda■—combined sound;
tumula■—tumultuous; abhavat—became.
Translation: "After that, the conchshells, bugles, trumpets, drums and horns were all of a sudden
sounded, and the combined sound was tumultuous."
Prabhup■da: Hm. So there are mention of various types of musical instruments. Those instruments are
no longer in use. But different types of bugles, drums, kettledrums, as they use in modern days. So the
same principle. By musical instruments, the soldiers are kept alive so they can fight nicely. Sa ■abdas
tumulo 'bhavat: "When simultaneously all the instruments were sounded, it become tumultuous."
Next verse. Tata■ ■vetair hayair yukte mahati syandane sthitau. Read it.
Pradyumna:
(break)
tata■—thereafter; ■vetai■—by white; hayai■—horses; yukte—being yoked with; mahati—in the great;
syandane—chariot; sthitau—so situated; m■dhava■—K■■■a (the husband of the goddess of
fortune); p■■■ava■—Arjuna (the son of P■■■u); ca—also; eva—certainly; divyau—transcendental;
■a■khau—conchshells; pradadhmatu■—sounded.
Translation: "On the other side, both Lord K■■■a and Arjuna, stationed on a great chariot drawn by
white horses, sounded their transcendental conchshells." (break)
Prabhup■da: So you have seen the picture. K■■■a is driving four white horses.
(reads from purport)
"In contrast with the conchshell blown by Bh■■madeva, the conchshells in the hands of K■■■a and
Arjuna are described as transcendental." K■■■a is transcendental. N■r■ya■a■ paro 'vyakt■t.
K■■■a is not of this material world. K■■■a's body, K■■■a's activities—everything of K■■■a—they
are transcendental. They are not of this material world. Divyam. In the catu■-■loki Bh■gavatam it is
said, when K■■■a was instructing Brahm■, aham ev■sam ev■gre (SB 2.9.33/34/35/36): "Before this
material creation, I was existing." In the Vedas also it is said, eko n■r■ya■a ■s■t: "Before creation,
only N■r■ya■a was there."
So K■■■a's position is always transcendental. He is not any creation of this material world. But
because He comes just like a human being and acts also just like human being, those who are less
intelligent, avaj■nanti, they think of K■■■a as ordinary human being. Avaj■nanti m■■ m■■h■■ (BG
9.11). M■■h■■. M■■h■■ means asses, or less intelligent class of men. They cannot understand
K■■■a's position.
K■■■a's position is always transcendental. When Arjuna inquired from Him about His instruction to
sun-god, K■■■a said, ima■ vivasvate yoga■ proktav■n aham avyayam (BG 4.1). This bhakti-yogam
of . . . as mentioned in the Bhagavad-g■t■ . . . Bhagavad-g■t■ is bhakti-yogam: to understand the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. So this literature is also transcendental. Bhakti is also
transcendental. Bhakti is not any activities of this material world. Janma karma me divyam (BG 4.9). So
bhakti is activity in relationship with K■■■a. Therefore it is not material. Sa gu■■n samat■tyait■n
brahma-bh■y■ya kalpate, m■■ ca 'vyabhic■re■a bhakti-yogena ya■ sevate (BG 14.26). Bhakti-yoga
is transcendental. And because K■■■a is transcendental, you cannot understand K■■■a by any
material method. Therefore K■■■a says, bhakty■ m■m abhij■n■ti (BG 18.55). The method also is
transcendental, not of this material world.
So if we can understand simply these facts, that K■■■a is transcendental, K■■■a's name is
transcendental, K■■■a's form is transcendental, sac-cid-■nanda-vigraha■ . . . ■■vara■ parama■
k■■■a■ sac-cid-■nanda-vigraha■ (Bs. 5.1). K■■■a's body is sac-cid-■nanda, not body like this.
This body is asat, acit and nir■nanda—just the opposite. This material body is asat. Asat means
temporary. It will not exist. But K■■■a's body is not like that. K■■■a's body is eternal. That is cit.
Sat-cit. Full of knowledge.
So less intelligent class of men, they cannot understand K■■■a. Therefore ■■stra says, ata■
■r■-k■■■a-n■m■di na bhaved gr■hyam indriyai■ (CC Madhya 17.136). These indriya, these
material senses, cannot speculate to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is not
possible. ■rama eva hi kevalam (SB 1.2.8). That is simply laboring, wasting time. K■■■a should be
understood as K■■■a says. He can explain Himself. Nobody can explain. Because our senses are
imperfect. We are deficient by four kinds of faults: we commit mistake; we are illusioned; with imperfect
senses we try to speak transcendental knowledge; therefore cheating. With imper . . . they will say:
"Probably," "Maybe." This is the so-called scientists' language. That means imperfect knowledge. Still
they want to teach. This is cheating. Knowledge must be perfect. Then you can teach others.
So our process is to receive the perfect knowledge from the perfect source and distribute it. We don't
manufacture knowledge. Therefore we are presenting Bhagavad-g■t■ as it is. As it is. The
Bhagavad-g■t■ is already perfect. Why shall I interpret with my imperfect senses? This is cheating.
But people want to be cheated. Vañcita-vañcaka-samprad■ya. The whole world is full of cheaters and
cheated. Because they want to be cheated, there are so many cheaters. They don't want real thing.
Here is the real thing: Bhagavad-g■t■, the Supreme Personality of Godhead speaking personally
about Himself.
Why should we interpret? Does it mean that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the supreme
authority, left something unexplained to be interpreted later on by some rascals? No. But the rascals
dare; they interpret. That is cheating. That is another fault. There are 640, -45 editions of
Bhagavad-g■t■. Simply cheating. Amongst them, there are big, big scholars. Not scholars; all rascals.
But they cheat. They pose themselves as scholars, and people want to be cheated, so they take their
words. So they cannot understand K■■■a. Cheated. They take the shelter of the cheaters; therefore
they are cheated.
So the m■y■ is very strong. M■y■ always dictates so that we may be cheated, "Why you are taking
K■■■a as the Supreme Personality of Godhead? Don't take. He is ordinary man. You can be also
equal with K■■■a. You also become God. You become also incarnation." This is going on. And people
flock there because they want to be cheated. What K■■■a says, they will not accept. K■■■a says,
sarva-dharm■n parityajya m■m eka■ ■ara■am (BG 18.66): "Only take to K■■■a consciousness."
Sarva-dharm■n. Because any dharma which is not approved by the Supreme Lord, K■■■a, that is not
dharma. dharma■ tu s■k■■d bhagavat-pra■■tam (SB 6.3.19).
A human being or a demigod or very exalted person cannot manufacture dharma. That is not possible.
Real dharma is given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, K■■■a, and that real dharma is stated
in the Bhagavad-g■t■: sarva-dharm■n parityajya m■m eka■ ■ara■a■ vraja (BG 18.66): "Just
surrender unto me." This is real dharma. Surrender to K■■■a and follow His instruction; your life will
be perfect.
Because you follow the perfect instruction, therefore you are also perfect. Simple process. To become
perfect, we have to follow the perfect instruction. So in the Bhagavad-g■t■ there is perfect instruction.
And if we take it as it is and follow it, then we become perfect. To become perfect is not very difficult
job. But because we don't want to become perfect, because we want to be cheated, we do not become
perfect. This is the difficulty.
So we should know from the very beginning that K■■■a is transcendental. And all His activities, they
are all transcendental. Although K■■■a appears just like ordinary human being . . . He does not
appear like ordinary human being, because K■■■a, when He was three months old only, He killed the
P■tan■ r■k■as■. A three months old child cannot kill such giant demon. It is not possible. K■■■a,
when He was six or seven years old, He lifted the Govardhana Hill.
So what is the difficulty for K■■■a? If K■■■a can float big, big, gigantic planets in the air just like
cotton swab floating, so is it very difficult for K■■■a to lift a mountain with His hand, with His finger?
That is not difficult for K■■■a. But those who want to be cheated, when K■■■a showed His
transcendental strength, they don't believe it—another cheating. They, they'll admit, "Oh, these are . . ."
What is called?
Devotee: Mythology.
Prabhup■da: Mythology. As if Vy■sadeva wrote this ■r■mad-Bh■gavatam to put before these rascals
some mythology, some imaginary things. Just see how they want to be cheated. Such an exalted
personality like Vy■sadeva, who has given us the Vedic literature, he presented something which is
imaginary. What business he has got? Therefore sometimes these cheated people, they deny to accept
that Bh■gavata is written by ■r■ Vy■sadeva. But those who are actually ■c■ryas, those who can
guide us, like ■a■kar■c■rya, R■m■nuj■c■rya, Madhv■c■rya, big, big . . . Caitanya Mah■prabhu,
they do not say like this, that "It is mythology. It is imaginary." They accept as it is.
So we have to follow these mah■jana. Mah■jano yena gata■ sa panth■■ dharmasya tattva■ nihito
guh■y■m (CC Madhya 17.186). We have to follow great personalities, ■c■ryas. ■c■ryav■n puru■o
veda (Ch■ndogya Upani■ad 6.14.2). One who has got . . . one who has taken shelter of ■c■rya, bona
fide spiritual master, he knows. ■c■ryav■n puru■o veda. Because he is receiving the right knowledge
from the right source, ■c■rya . . . Eva■ parampar■-pr■ptam ima■ r■jar■ayo vidu■ (BG 4.2). ■c■rya
means by disciplic succession.
As K■■■a says, disciplic succession, all the ■c■ryas will say the same thing. They will not change;
they will not interpret. They can explain, but the original fact is not distorted. That is ■c■rya. ■c■rya
will never say that "K■■■a is material. K■■■a . . . there was no such thing as K■■■a. There was no
such battle, Battle of Kuruk■etra. These are all imaginary." So if we don't want to be cheated, then we
should take K■■■a as He is presenting Himself and as it is confirmed by the ■c■ryas. Then our
knowledge is perfect. So here it is said:
K■■■a and His devotee Arjuna, they are on the same platform. Therefore M■dhava and P■■■ava.
They blew their transcendental conchshell. This is not ordinary.
(reads from purport)
"The sounding of the transcendental conchshells indicated that there was no hope of victory for the
other side." This is the sounding. Divyau. They are also sounding their conchshell, even Bh■■ma, but
that cannot be compared with the conchshells of M■dhava and P■■■ava. Arjuna, associates, they are
also equally powerful. Nobody can be associates of K■■■a without being very, very much advanced.
Just like fire can mix with fire, similarly water can mix with water; similarly, unless one is
transcendentally advanced, he cannot be associate of K■■■a. The Narottama d■sa ■h■kura sings:
Gaur■■gera sa■gi-ga■e. ■r■ Caitanya Mah■prabhu, K■■■a, and His associates:
All the devotees. So Narottama d■sa ■h■kura says: "So all these associates of Caitanya Mah■prabhu
should be known they are also of the same category." Gaur■■gera sa■gi-ga■e, nitya-siddha boli
m■ne.
This word nitya-siddha is significant. Nitya-siddha and nitya-baddha. There are two kinds of living
entities. Nitya-baddha means ever-conditioned. Ever-conditioned means those who are in this material
world, they do not know when they came in touch with this material world, neither they do know when
they will be liberated. They are called nitya-baddha, ever-conditioned. And similarly, there are
nitya-siddhas. Nitya-siddhas means they never come in contact with this material world, and even they
come here for some business, they do not forget their position. That is nitya-siddha.
Try to understand. There are two kinds of living entities: nitya-siddha, nitya-baddha. Nitya-baddhas are
within this material world. Beginning from Brahm■ down to a small ant, insignificant ant, they are all
nitya-baddhas. Anyone who is in this material world—nitya-baddha. And nitya-siddhas, they belong to
the spiritual world. They never come in contact with this material world, and even they come for some
business under the order of the Supreme Lord, they do not touch these material qualities. They remain
always transcendental. As K■■■a remains always transcendental, even though He is in this material
world, similarly, K■■■a's nitya-siddha associates, they are also transcendental. They never touch this
material world.
So try to understand the position of K■■■a. K■■■a is n■r■ya■a■ para, transcendental, para■
avyakt■t. That is puru■ottama-yoga in the Bhagavad-g■t■. K■■■a has said: "Anyone who has
understood Me," ajam avyayam, ajam, "I never take birth in this material world, neither I am
deteriorated by material contact—he knows Me perfectly." That is called puru■ottama. Puru■a uttama.
Uttama. Uttama means "not of this material world." Ut. Ut means above, and tama means this
darkness. So ut-tama means "above this darkness." So uttama puru■a. Puru■a uttama.
Puru■a, we are also . . . puru■a means enjoyer. Prak■ti means enjoyed. So actually, we are not
puru■a; we are prak■ti. That is stated in the Bhagavad-g■t■: apareyam itas tu viddhi me prak■ti■
par■m, j■va-bh■t■■ mah■-b■ho yayeda■ dh■ryate jagat (BG 7.5). Apareyam, these material
elements, bh■mir ■po 'nalo v■yu■ (BG 7.4), earth, water, fire, air, sky, mind, intelligence, bhinn■ me
prak■tir a■■adh■, these are separated energies, material energies of K■■■a. They are also prak■ti.
As this material world is prak■ti, similarly, there is another prak■ti, K■■■a gives information.
Apareyam itas tu viddhi me prak■ti■ par■m. But that is par■-prak■ti. So we are not puru■a; we are
prak■tis. Although by materially dressed we appear to be puru■a, actually, we are not puru■a. Just
like if you dress one woman like a man, that does not mean she has become man. She is woman.
Similarly, we are puru■a in the sense that we are trying to imitate the supreme puru■a, Puru■ottama.
K■■■a is the supreme enjoyer. We are trying to become imitation K■■■a. Just like so many rascals,
they declare that "God. I am God." That is the last snare, M■y■v■da. First of all we try to become
enjoyer, like the head of the family man or a minister or this and that, so many. Everyone is trying to
become head, enjoyer. And at last, being baffled in every respect, he wants to become God. This is the
last snare of m■y■. Nobody can become God. He is Puru■ottama and we are prak■tis. Artificially,
how we can become enjoyer? Prak■ti means enjoyed. Enjoyer and . . . predominator and the
predominated.
So j■va-bh■ta, we j■vas, we are all prak■ti. Puru■a is only K■■■a. All living entities . . . Vi■■u-tattva
is puru■a-tattva, and we are ■akti-tattva, ■akti, energy, marginal energy of K■■■a. So energy is
prak■ti. So prak■ti is not puru■a. So M■y■v■da philosophy is wrong. They pose them as so 'ham. So
'ham, "I am the same." How you can be same? In the ■■stra it is said that, "You living entity, you are
prak■ti." How you can become same, you puru■a? This is mistake.
How prak■ti, how a woman can become man? Artificially one can become. Here also, so-called
woman, they are also puru■a. They are thinking puru■a. Puru■a means enjoyer. Here woman is also
thinking to enjoy, and the so-called man is also thinking to enjoy. Everyone. Nobody wants to serve.
Everyone wants to be served. Puru■a attitude. Everyone wants to be served. Nobody wants to serve.
This is the material conception of life.
So when we agree to serve, not to be served, that is liberated person. When we agree to serve only,
not to be served. Not to accept service from others, but to serve others—that is real liberation. But here
the material disease is that everyone is making plan, "How others will serve me." This is called m■y■.
This is called m■y■. M■y■ means that artificially we want to be served. That is not possible. When we
agree to serve . . . as Caitanya Mah■prabhu has given us the path of liberation, j■vera svar■pa hoy
nitya-k■■■a-d■sa, this is our position. We are eternal servant of K■■■a.
So when we engage ourself in the service of K■■■a . . . the whole Bhagavad-g■t■ is spoken on this
basis. Arjuna was artificially declining to serve K■■■a. K■■■a wanted him to fight, and Arjuna was
putting so many reason, how he could fight and kill the other side, who are his kinsmen, who are
nephews, who are brothers, grandfather? This argument were being put. So that means he refused to
serve K■■■a. That is material condition.
He was thinking in his own terms. He wanted to enjoy the family members, the so-called nephews,
brothers that, "If they are killed, then what is the use of my this kingdom?" Everyone . . . (break) . . . but
people thinks that "I get kingdom. I enjoy myself." That is condition. But a liberated soul will take the
kingdom, but it will be used for K■■■a's service. That is liberated.
In this way we should try to understand K■■■a, K■■■a's name, K■■■a's fame, K■■■a's
associates, K■■■a's activities—all divyam, transcendental. They are not material. Therefore it is
mentioned here, divyau ■a■khau pradadhmatu■ (BG 1.14). Divyau ■a■khau. The ■a■kha used by
K■■■a and Arjuna, they are not ordinary ■a■kha.
Thank you very much. Hare K■■■a.
Devotees: Jaya ■r■la Prabhup■da. (end)
