Pradyumna: O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. (leads chanting of verse) (Prabhup■da and devotees
repeat)
(break)
(break)
yadi—even if; m■m—unto me; aprat■k■ram—without being resistant; a■astram—without being fully
equipped; ■astra-p■■aya■—those with weapons in hand; dh■rtar■■■r■■—the sons of
Dh■tar■■■ra; ra■e—in the battlefield; hanyu■—may kill; tat—that; me—mine; k■emataram—better;
bhavet—become.
Translation: "I would consider it better for the sons of Dh■tar■■■ra to kill me unarmed and unresisting,
rather than fight with them."
sañjaya■—Sañjaya; uv■ca—said; evam—thus; uktv■—saying; arjuna■—Arjuna; sa■khye—in the
battlefield; ratha—chariot; upastha■—situated on; up■vi■at—sat down again; vis■jya—keeping aside;
sa-■aram—along with arrows; c■pam—the bow; ■oka—lamentation; sa■vigna—distressed;
m■nasa■—within the mind.
Translation: "Sañjaya said: Arjuna, having thus spoken on the battlefield, cast aside his bow and arrows
and sat down on the chariot, his mind overwhelmed with grief."
Prabhup■da: Yadi m■■ apratik■ram a■astram ■astra-p■■aya■. It is the custom between the
k■atriyas that in the fighting, if the other party hasn't got weapon to fight, this party will supply him
weapon, not that the other party without weapon, and this party will take opportunity to kill him. This is
not the rules and regulation of fighting. There are many rules and regulation of the fighting. Not that
"Because he is my enemy, I shall kill him any way." No. There are rules and regulation.
If the enemy has broken his chariot, he is fallen down on the ground, the other party also will
immediately get down from the chariot. Suppose he is fleeing . . . if one is on the foot and another on
the chariot, so he will be in superior position. So therefore the opposite party must also get down from
the chariot and walk with him. That means the defeated enemy should be given all opportunities so he
may not think that unnecessarily, in weak position, he has been killed. No.
So Arjuna says . . . Arjuna, of course, did later on. When he killed Kar■a, Kar■a was without weapon,
and he fell down from the chariot. Kar■a, after falling down from the chariot, and he was trying to raise
the wheel of the chariot from the mud, so K■■■a asked Arjuna that, "This is the opportunity to kill him.
You kill him immediately." So at that time he had no weapons, and he fell down from the chariot, and in
that position he was killed by Arjuna by the order of K■■■a. This is violating the laws.
So you can violate the laws on the order of K■■■a. You cannot do. This is surrender. When K■■■a
says that, "You do this," although it is wrong, you have to do it. There is no consideration. Just like in
fight, the commander says to the soldiers, "Do this." His duty is to do that. He should not think at that
time what is right or wrong. Just like Yudhi■■hira Mah■r■ja, he was advised by K■■■a that,
"Yudhi■■hira, Mah■r■ja Yudhi■■hira, you go to Dro■■c■rya and inform him that, 'Your son is dead.'
"It was a false information. Because Dro■■c■rya will not die if he is not affected with some
lamentation. So K■■■a asked Mah■r■ja Yudhi■■hira that, "You go, because you are recognized
truthful, dharmar■ja. So when you will say, this is also false, he will believe." But Yudhi■■hira
hesitated, "How can I tell lie?" He disobeyed the order of K■■■a, and he wanted to become very
truthful. For this reason he had to see hell.
So in the mundane consideration there are so many things right and wrong. So long you are on the
mundane platform, you have to obey all these right and wrong. But in the spiritual platform, when it is
ordered by K■■■a . . . He is above all this duality. He is Absolute. So even if He says to do something
wrong . . . because He cannot say anything which is wrong. God is all-good. If you discriminate God's
order from the mundane platform, then you will be misguided. Anyone who has got firm and fixed-up
faith that whatever God does, whatever God orders, even from mundane calculation it may be wrong,
that is right . . . that is absolute understanding.
So those who are in the spiritual platform, for them, there is no such consideration, which is right and
which is wrong. Their only consideration is whether K■■■a is pleased. That's all. If K■■■a is pleased
by inducing me to do something wrong, I will not hesitate to do it. I shall do it, because it is K■■■a's
order. Tasmin tu■■e jagat tu■■am. My principle should be, "If K■■■a is satisfied, then everything is
all right." But while we are in the mundane platform, we should not concoct the idea that, "K■■■a is
pleased; let me do that." No. That you cannot do.
You have to follow the rules and regulation. But if you think that it is . . . you cannot think, neither you
can manufacture. So either you should hear from directly . . . from K■■■a directly or . . . that is not
possible, because we are not in touch with K■■■a at the present moment. We are trying to see
K■■■a through the transparent medium of spiritual master. So we cannot manufacture that, "This is
K■■■a's desire." No. You have to get it confirmed from the transparent medium, spiritual master.
These are the principles.
So Arjuna says, yadi m■m apratik■ram. Pratik■ram, apratik■ram. Pratik■ram means counteraction,
and apratik■ram means without any counteraction. So he is informing K■■■a that, "If the other party,"
dh■rtar■■■r■■, "the sons of Dh■tar■■■ra, other party, they kill me while I am not prepared . . ." But
that is not the regulation of fighting. So therefore he says apratik■ram: "Whether if I am not prepared
and they kill me all of a sudden, this is wrong. So I accept, even they kill me, apratik■ram, without I am
fully equipped . . ." A■astram. In the fight, one must be equipped with all weapons. "But when I am not
equipped with weapons or I am not willing to fight . . . because I am not willing to fight."
This has been decided "I cannot kill my kinsmen. Therefore I am not going to take the step of
pratik■ram, counteraction. So even in this condition they come and kill me," yadi m■m apratik■ram
a■astram, "I am not fully equipped with ■astra, weapons," a■astram and ■astra-p■■aya■, "and they
are fully equipped with weapons," dh■rtar■■■r■ ra■e hanyus, "so in this condition the other party, my
cousin-brothers, sons of Dh■tar■■■ra, if they kill me," ra■e hanyus, tan me k■ematara■ bhavet, "I
shall prefer that. I am not going to fight. If you think that, 'If you don't fight, then they will take the
opportunity . . .' " He is talking with K■■■a. He is already giving the counterargument that, "K■■■a, if
you think that I don't fight, but they will take the opportunity and kill me immediately, that also I shall
prefer. But I am not going to fight. This is my decision."
Sañjaya uv■ca. So Sañjaya, the secretary of Dh■tar■■■ra . . . they were sitting in a room. So, evam
uktv■, "Thus saying," Arjuna, the person . . . Arjuna is nominative case. Arjuna, sa■khye, "in the
battlefield"; rathopastha, "on the chariot"; up■vi■at. You have seen the picture. When K■■■a blew His
conchshell, and from the back side, Arjuna is just trying to take his arrow and fight . . . but instead of
fighting, he's vis■jya sa-■ara■ c■pam: "No, no, no. I am not going to . . . giving up. Finished. I am no
more going to fight." Vis■jya sa-■ara■ c■pam. Why it is? ■oka-sa■vigna-m■nasa■. His mind was
overwhelmed with lamentation, that "How can I kill my kinsmen?" This is the position.
So apratik■ram, pratik■ram. There are two things. Pratik■ram means counteraction. Here in this
material world, for everything there is counteraction. Just like if you are diseased, so you have to take
the medicine. That is pratik■ram. The disease is caused by some, what is called, disarrangement
within the body. So we have to arrange, we have to set up the disarrangement within the body. That is
pratik■ram. Medicine; counteraction. Similarly, if somebody is coming to kill you, so you also become
prepared to kill him. This is pratik■ram. If somebody is drowning in the sea, then you have to give him
some help, send some boat or some life buoy so that he can be saved.
So we have got so many . . . this material world is going on. It is full of dangers. Pada■ pada■ yad
vipadam (SB 10.14.58). Material world means step by step, simply danger. That is material world. So
you have to find out pratik■ram, counteraction, how to save yourself from danger. Just like when we
walk, we see in so many doors, "Danger," so that you may be . . . you are warned. Sometimes the
doors are, "Beware of the dog." So you have to take care, "No, I shall not enter." So everything there is
danger, and there is pratik■ram, counter, counteraction, how to save yourself from it. This is called
struggle for existence. In this material world, there is only this danger and counteraction. I am unhappy;
so just to become happy I have to work, I have to get money. Whatever I want. So this is going on.
Pratik■ram, danger, vipadam. Pada■ pada■ yad vipadam. Pada■ pada■ yad vipada■ na te■■m.
So sam■■rit■ ye pada-pallava■ plavam. Anyone who has taken shelter of the lotus feet of K■■■a,
sam■■rit■ ye pada-pallava■ plava■ mahat-pada■ pu■ya-ya■o mur■re■. Mur■ri. Mur■ri means
K■■■a. So pu■ya-ya■o. He is simply glorified by pious activities. There is no impious activities in
K■■■a. K■■■a is the purest. So whatever He does, that is pure. The rascals, they do not know this.
They think, "K■■■a is immoral." And he has become a professor, teacher. He does not know; he does
not understand K■■■a.
So many big, big professors, learned scholars, they do not understand what is K■■■a. And they
talking about K■■■a. They are taking the position of instructing about K■■■a. Just see how
rascaldom. You do not know something perfectly, and still, you are talking about it. This is going on.
Pu■ya-ya■o mur■re■. What is K■■■a? K■■■a says, bah■n■■ janman■m ante jñ■nav■n m■■
prapadyante (BG 7.19). We have to know K■■■a. Because as soon as you know K■■■a, you
become immediately liberated.
So knowing K■■■a is not so easy thing. Therefore K■■■a says, manu■y■■■■ sahasre■u ka■cid
yatati siddhaye (BG 7.3). First of all you become siddha, perfect. Perfect means perfect knowledge.
That is called siddha. And another siddha means very powerful, master of all yogic perfection. That is
also siddha. Yog■ is perfection, eight kinds of perfection: anim■-laghim■ siddhi pr■pti■ asita-vasita,
pr■k■mya■. So they obtain eight kinds of siddhis. They are also called siddhas.
From material point of view, a perfect yog■ can counteract anything, and whatever he likes, he can do.
That is called siddhi, a■■a-siddhi. But still, he is not as siddha as K■■■a. K■■■a's name is
Yoge■vara. He is the master of all the yog■s. Yoge■vara. Yatra yoge■vara■ k■■■a■ (BG 18.78).
The yog■s also, they are deficient with K■■■a's power. Still, some rascals, without any yoga siddhi,
they claim that, "I have become God." What is your qualification? Have you got all the yoga-siddha?
Then how you claim that you are . . .?
But rascals, they claim to become God, and other rascals, they also believe that, "Here is God." Both of
them are animals. ■va-vi■-var■ho■■ra-kharai■ sa■stuta■ puru■a■ pa■u■ (SB 2.3.19). One who
does not know actually what is K■■■a, if he accepts somebody, some rascal, as God, then he is also
animal. That is also animal. One who is claiming that, "I am as good as K■■■a," he is certainly animal,
crazy. He does not know what is the power of K■■■a, how much He is Yoge■vara. Still, he is falsely
claiming to become K■■■a. And one who accepts him as K■■■a . . .
(aside) Huh? What is this?
Devotee: The offering . . . (indistinct)
Prabhup■da: So K■■■a . . . one should understand first of all K■■■a. Without understanding
K■■■a, if somebody remarks, if he thinks K■■■a as ordinary human being, avaj■nanti m■■ m■■h■
m■nu■■■ tanum ■■ritam (BG 9.11), that is the m■■ha's business, rascals' business. K■■■a,
because He comes as ordinary human being, manu■ya-l■l■, if we take Him, K■■■a, as like me, like
ordinary, then I am a m■■ha. How a human child, at the age of six or seven years, one can lift the
whole mountain Govardhana? First of all try to understand K■■■a, how much powerful He is. How a
three-months-old child can kill a big demon, P■tan■? These things are there in the Bh■gavatam about
K■■■a's life. How do you claim to become as good as K■■■a? This is crazy. Animalism.
So K■■■a's order must be final. If He says, then everything is all right. So here Arjuna's position is:
K■■■a has already arranged the battle, and he knows that K■■■a wants this battle—still, he says
that yadi m■m apratik■ram. He decides in his own way. This is called m■y■. He knows what is
K■■■a's desire, and still, he is speaking his own philosophy. That means Arjuna is placing himself on
the position of ordinary man. Ordinary man does not know what is K■■■a and what is K■■■a's
desire, and he manufactures his own philosophy and thoughts. That is ordinary man.
But Arjuna, he is always friend of K■■■a, constant friend. His name is Gu■■ke■a, "above all
darkness." Certainly he must be. One who is K■■■a's friend directly, how there can be ignorance?
There cannot be. Then why Arjuna is playing that part? He knows K■■■a's desire; still, he says that
yadi m■m apratik■ram a■astram ■astra-p■■aya■. And no . . . tan me k■ematara■ bhavet. He is
playing like that. Because without playing, Arjuna's playing like that, how this Bhagavad-g■t■ will
come? This is just like, just like playing on the stage. One very rich man, he is, in a drama, he is playing
the part of a very poor man. But actually he is not poor man. But in the stage he is playing the part of a
poor man. Similarly, Arjuna is not bewildered, but for the time being he appears to be bewildered by
K■■■a's m■y■, because K■■■a wants to speak Bhagavad-g■t■ for the benefit of the whole world,
that what is spiritual knowledge. Therefore this is a stage arrangement.
So pratik■ram and apratik■ram. This whatever we have manufactured, pratik■ram, counteraction, that
will be also failure if K■■■a does not sanction it. That is realized by Prahl■da Mah■r■ja. He says: "My
dear Lord," Hira■yaka■ipu that, "people have manufactured so many pratik■ram, counteraction." But
tanu-bh■t■m, "Those who have accepted this material body, they are simply manufacturing things to
counteract dangers. But even though they have all this counteracting machine or counteracting agents,
still, without Your sanction, this counteracting machine or agent will not be fruitful." So similarly, Arjuna
is being protected by K■■■a. So even though Arjuna is not well equipped, apratik■ram, still he will be
saved, because K■■■a is there. T■vad vibho tanu-bh■t■■ tvad-upek■it■n■m (SB 7.9.19). And even
one is well equipped and if K■■■a does not like to save him, he'll not be saved. Always mind this.
Rak■e k■■■a mare ke, mare k■■■a rak■e ke. This is ordinary, that if K■■■a wants to kill you,
nobody can save you. And if K■■■a wants to save you, nobody can kill you. This is the position.
So the examples are given by Prahl■da Mah■r■ja: b■lasya neha ■ara■a■ pitarau n■si■ha (SB
7.9.19). "My Lord, N■si■ha-deva, the parents of children, they are not actually protector of the
children." Because generally we think that, "This child, this boy, has got his father, mother; he is well
protected." No. That father and mother . . . every father and mother wants to protect the child, but still,
the child has to meet some danger and dies. There are so many experience. Similarly, b■lasya neha
■ara■a■ pitarau n■si■ha. The father, mother is a counteraction for the dangers of the child. But
Prahl■da Mah■r■ja said: "No, they are not counteraction." It is not that if a child is in danger, because
the father and mother is very strong, very rich, he will be able to give protection to the child. No. That is
not possible.
Then n■rtasya c■gadam. The medicine . . . a person is suffering from some disease, some fatal
disease. If you think, "I shall engage first-class physician and I shall supply first-class medicine," if you
think, "then the patient will be saved," no, that is not possible. That is not possible. We have got many
experiences like that. Then no rich man would have died. Because he has got money, he can employ
first-class physician, first-class medicine, and simply by engaging such things, counteracting,
pratik■ram, he cannot be saved. There are many examples like that. So the conclusion is, t■vad vibho
tanu-bh■t■■ tvad-upek■it■n■m (SB 7.9.19): "If You neglect, if You have decided that this person, this
child cannot be saved, then any amount of pratik■ram will not help. Will not help."
Therefore real pratik■ram is K■■■a. Real pratik■ram is K■■■a, counteractive. So better we take
shelter of K■■■a as K■■■a says, sarva-dharm■n parityajya m■m eka■ ■ara■a■ vraja (BG 18.66).
You must always know that no counteraction will be beneficial for us unless we are protected by
K■■■a.
So therefore our business is fully surrender to K■■■a and seek His protection. K■■■a says, "Yes,"
aha■ tv■■ sarva-p■pebhyo mok■ayi■y■mi, "I shall give you protection." This is Bhagavad-g■t■
philosophy. We have to believe on the assertion of K■■■a that, "He is prepared to give me all
protection, provided I have fully surrendered unto His lotus feet."
Thank you very much.
Devotees: Jaya ■r■la Prabhup■da. (end)
