Pradyumna: (leads chanting of verse) (Prabhup■da and devotees repeat)
(break)
Prabhup■da: Now, in your leisure hour you will try to repeat and get by heart some of the ■lokas. That
will be very nice. Go on.
Pradyumna:
dh■tar■■■ra■—King Dh■tar■■■ra; uv■ca—said; dharma-k■etre—in the place of pilgrimage;
kuru-k■etre—in the place named Kuruk■etra; samavet■■—assembled; yuyatsava■—desiring to fight;
m■mak■■—my party (sons); p■■■av■■—the sons of P■■■u; ca—and; eva—certainly; kim—what;
akurvata—did they do; sañjaya—O Sañjaya.
Translation: "Dh■tar■■■ra said: O Sañjaya, after assembling in the place of pilgrimage at Kuruk■etra,
what did my sons and the sons of P■■■u do, being desirous to fight?"
Prabhup■da: Hm. So the history is, that same family, there was dispute who would occupy the throne.
Dh■tar■■■ra and . . . actually he was the eldest son of the king, and next was P■■■u. So every
country the law of primogeniture, what is called? The eldest child . . . in your country, even the eldest
child is a girl, she also occupies the throne. Just like present Queen Elizabeth. Formerly there was
Queen Victoria; before that, another Elizabeth. But in India woman has no such right. The woman is
never given any responsible post. That is the opinion of the greatest politician in the history of the
world, C■■akya Pa■■ita. According to his opinion, vi■v■so naiva kartavya■ str■■u r■ja-kule■u ca.
He has given his explicit opinion that, "You cannot trust with any responsible post or any responsibility
with a woman and politician." Those who are diplomat, politician, you cannot trust them.
So the general regulation is that woman should remain under the protection of husband, er, father,
husband and children. Just like these P■■■us, their mother, Kunt■, she was very, very qualified lady.
But still, after the death of her husband, she always remained with the sons. The sons are going to the
forest; the mother is also going. Also the wife is also going, Draupad■. This was the . . . so two parties .
. . Dh■tar■■■ra was the eldest son, but he was blind, bodily defective. Therefore he was not awarded
the throne. His next brother, P■■■u, he was offered the throne, but he died very early age, a young
man. When these P■■■us, the five sons, Yudhi■■hira Mah■r■ja—at that time not
Mah■r■ja—Yudhi■■hira, Bh■ma, Arjuna, Nakula, Sahadeva, they were very small children, so they
were taken care of by Dh■tar■■■ra and other elderly family . . . Bh■■madeva. He was the
grandfather of the P■■■avas. He was the elder uncle of Dh■tar■■■ra. Bh■■ma was elder brother of
Dh■tar■■■ra's father. He was so old. But he was . . . actually, the kingdom belonged to Bh■■ma, but
he remained a brahmac■r■; he did not marry. There was no issue of Bh■■madeva. Therefore his
nephews, Dh■tar■■■ra and P■■■u, they were inheritor.
Now, after the death of P■■■u, there was conspiracy. Dh■tar■■■ra wanted that, "Actually, this is my
kingdom. Now, somehow or other, I could not get it. Now my brother is dead. So if I do not inherit, why
not my sons.?" This was the politics. Politics are always there, and enviousness, jealousy. This is the
nature of this material world. You cannot avoid it. Spiritual world means just the opposite. There is no
politics. There is no jealousy. There is no enviousness. That is spiritual world. And material world
means politics, jealousy, diplomacy, enviousness, so many things. This is material world. So even in
the heavenly planets, these things are there, politics. Even in animal kingdom these politics are there.
This is the nature. Matsarat■. Matsarat■ means enviousness. One man is envious of another man. It
doesn't matter even they are brothers or family members. Here the family members, Dh■tar■■■ra and
P■■■u, two brothers, their sons, they were family members, but the enviousness.
So the K■■■a consciousness movement is not for the persons who are envious. Envious. It is a
movement to train people how to become not envious. It is very first class scientific movement, yes. Not
to become envious. Therefore ■r■mad-Bh■gavatam in the beginning introduces, dharma■
projjhita-kaitavo atra (SB 1.1.2). In this ■r■mad-Bh■gavatam, dharma, religious principle, cheating
type of religious principle is completely eradicated, thrown away, projjhita. They are kicked out,
projjhita. Just like you collect all the dirty things from the room, sweeping, and then kick out, don't keep
it within the room. Similarly, cheating type of religious system—kicked out. It is not such religion, "this
religion," "that religion." Any religion system, if there is jealousy, that is not religion. Jealousy means . . .
we should understand jealousy, what is jealousy. Jealousy means that you are rightful owner of
something, I won't allow you to take it. This is jealousy. This is jealousy. Jealousy, try to understand.
Suppose you are rightful owner of something, and I am trying that, "You don't own it. I shall own it," or
"Somebody own it, I shall not allow it." This is jealousy.
So what is the rightful ownership of the living entity? That is to be understood. Birthright, what is called
birthright. Just like everyone has got right to live under the protection of the government. Everyone.
That is good government. Government should give security of life and property. That is government.
Not only for the human being, but for even for the ant. This is government. Not that I give protection to
my brother and not to others. That is not . . . just like Par■k■it Mah■r■ja, he was giving protection to
the animals also. When he was on his tour, as soon as he saw that a black man was trying to kill one
cow, oh, immediately he took his sword, "Who are you? You are trying to kill?"
So this is good government. Unless the government is equal to everyone . . . just like God is equal to
everyone. The king or the government must be representative of God. Therefore, according to Vedic
civilization, king is offered as good respect as to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. King is called
nara-deva. Nara-deva. That means "God in human form." King is given . . . why? Because he acts as
the representative of God. He cannot be jealous to any living entity, at least born in his kingdom. That is
called praj■. Praj■ means one who has taken birth, or, in other words, national, national. So that was
the duty.
So formerly, when there was fight between two kings, it is on the principle that who is giving good
protection to the citizens, not for personal profit. Who is able to give good protection, life, security for life
and property, he should become king. So these persons, this Dh■tar■■■ra and his sons, they were
jealous. How they could give protection to the citizens? They are themselves jealous. Just like
nowadays, all these politicians, they are jealous. They cannot give any protection to the citizens. They
are simply interested with their party politics. They have no time even to think how to give nice
protection to the citizen so that they may feel happy always that, "We have got good government. There
is no cause of anxiety. We have got sufficient food, sufficient protection, sufficient
opulence—everything sufficient." That is good government.
So here, Dh■tar■■■ra, he is jealous. He cannot give any good government. K■■■a knew it. K■■■a
sent a messenger, Akrura. You have read in the ■r■mad-Bh■gavatam. Before this Battle of
Kuruk■etra from Dv■rak■, He sent His uncle Akr■ra: "Just go to Hastin■pura, New Delhi, and see
what is the situation." So Akr■ra understood that Dh■tar■■■ra was planning something. So he talked
with him that "Why you are implicated in such planning? K■■■a does not want it." Although
Dh■tar■■■ra knew that K■■■a was the Supreme Personality of Godhead . . . so Dh■tar■■■ra said
that, "I know that what I am planning, that is not good. I know K■■■a—the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. And He has requested me. But I tell you frankly, I cannot do without it. So when K■■■a will
be pleased upon me, I may be."
So this is the position of the materialistic person. A materialistic person knows that he is sinful. A
materialistic person knows that whatever he is doing is wrong, but he cannot check. Just like the thief.
A thief knows that if he commits stealing, he will be arrested, he will be punished. He knows. Because
he heard from law books, from other sources, and he has also seen that a thief is arrested and he is
taken by the police for being punished. So we have got two kinds of experiences: by hearing and by
seeing directly. In Bengali it is called dekh■-■un■. In India it is called. The two kinds of experience:
one by seeing, practically experiencing, hand to hand; another by hearing. So one who is intelligent, he
gets his experience simply by hearing from the right source. That is nice.
So our process is that we are getting experience about the perfect knowledge, the destination of life,
simply by hearing from K■■■a. So we are the most intelligent person. It is not possible to experience
directly, but if one has got intelligence, then simply by hearing and considering and thinking over it, he
gets the experience. So those who are very sinful, they get experience by hearing and by direct seeing,
directly seeing also—still, they cannot check from sinful activities. So Dh■tar■■■ra, Dh■tar■■■ra, by
his sinful activities he became so much fallen that he did not hear anybody's advice, Vidura's advice,
Bh■■ma's advice that, "Don't plan like this. They are rightful owner. The P■■■avas, they are rightful
owners. They are minor, but don't try to cheat them." But Dh■tar■■■ra was . . .
So when the planning was complete and the warfield was set up at dharma-k■etre kuru-k■etre (BG
1.1) . . . dharma-k■etre means, kuru-k■etre, that place is a pilgrimage. People still go to observe
religious ritualistic performances. And in the Vedas there is injunction, kuru-k■etre dharmam ■caret: "If
you want to perform some ritualistic ceremonies, religious, then go to Kuruk■etra." So Kuruk■etra is a
dharma-k■etra. It is a not fictitious thing, just like rascal commentators, so-called, they say,
"Kuruk■etra means this body." It is not that. As it is.
Try to understand Bhagavad-g■t■ as it is. Kuruk■etra, dharma-k■etra. It is a place of religion. And
especially when K■■■a was present there, it is already. Why this house? Before our occupation, why
this house was an ordinary house? Now it is temple. It is dharma-k■etra, it is a religious place. Why?
Because K■■■a is there. K■■■a is there. So either you take Kuruk■etra ordinary place, but because
in the battlefield K■■■a was there directing Arjuna, so it is already dharma-k■etra.
So formerly people were religiously trained up. So they could not speak lies in a dharma-k■etra. That is
still the practice. Just like in the Western world, the Christians go to the church, they admit, confession,
"Yes, I have done it." But that has become a formality. But actually, one should admit in religious place
that "Yes, I have done this." But that does not mean you admit and again do it. No. You admit once,
then you are excused. But don't do it again.
So here Dh■tar■■■ra says, samavet■ yuyutsava■ (BG 1.1): "All these people, my sons," m■mak■■
. . . m■mak■■. That means "my sons," and p■■■ava, "and my brother P■■■u's sons," samavet■,
"they assembled." What is the purpose? The purpose is yuyutsava■. This word yuyutsu is still used in
Japan. Perhaps you know, yuyutsa, fighting. So yuyutsu, those who are desirous of fighting. Now, both
the parties were desiring to fight, and they assembled. Why he is asking question, kim akurvata: "What
did they do?" Because he was little doubtful that "These boys, after being assembled in dharma-k■etra
kuru-k■e . . . they might have changed their ideas. They might have settled up." Actually, the sons of
Dh■tar■■■ra might have admitted, "Yes, P■■■avas, you are actually the owner. What is the use of
unnecessarily fighting?"
So he was very much anxious whether they had changed their decision. Therefore he is asking.
Otherwise there was no question of asking, kim akurvata. He . . . just like if you are given food, if I ask
somebody that, "Such-and-such gentleman was served with nice dishes. Then what did he do?" this is
foolish question. He would eat. That's all. (laughter) What is the question of, "What did he do?"
Similarly, when it is already settled up that they were to fight, there was no such question as kim
akurvata, "What did they do?" But he asked this question because he was doubtful whether they had
changed their opinion.
Kim akurvata sañjaya (BG 1.1). He was asking his secretary. He was blind man. He was always
conducted by his secretary, Sañjaya, a very faithful secretary. And he is explaining the Bhagavad-g■t■
by experiencing, by television within the heart. That art is not yet developed. You have got television
through machine, but there is another television—you can see within your heart everything, what is
going on outside. So that television was known to . . . that will be explained by Sañjaya, that by the
grace of Vy■sadeva, he learned this televisioning, and he was sitting with his master within the room,
and he was actually seeing how the fighting is going on, and he was explaining. This is the basic
principle of Bhagavad-g■t■, I mean, the basic platform. So let us discuss gradually, one after an . . .
Thank you very much. Hare K■■■a.
Devotees: All glories to Prabhup■da. (break)
Prabhup■da: . . . leader to Bhagavad-g■t■ and became a s■dhu, mah■tm■, but when they found that
a mah■tm■ is leader and he is a great student of Bhagavad-g■t■, and by the way all people gathered
round him. Although he was a politician, he has nothing to do with Bhagavad-g■t■ or mah■tm■. No.
(laughter) Because the definition of mah■tm■ is given in the Bhagavad-g■t■. The definition of
mah■tm■ is there: mah■tm■nas tu m■■ p■rtha daiv■■ prak■tim ■■rit■■, bhajanty ananya
manaso (BG 9.13). This is mah■tm■. Mah■tm■ means he has taken shelter of K■■■a cent percent,
and his only business is to worship and glorify K■■■a. That is mah■tm■.
So Gandhi never believed that there was K■■■a, but he became mah■tm■ by popular vote. That's all.
That kind of mah■tm■ is not accepted by the ■■stra. Mah■tm■ is . . . first symptom of mah■tm■ is
that he must be a great devotee of K■■■a. That is mah■tm■. That is . . . mah■tm■nas tu m■■
p■rtha daiv■■ prak■tim ■■rit■■ (BG 9.13).
And he is not under any material world. He is in the spiritual world. Daiv■■ prak■tim ■■rit■■. And
what is the symptom? Bhajanty ananya-manaso. Ananya-manaso, without any diversion, he's simply
devoted to K■■■a. This is mah■tm■. Everything is there in the Bhagavad-g■t■, therefore I request
you to study Bhagavad-g■t■ thoroughly as it is. Then you become perfectly powerful, spiritual.
Now chant Hare K■■■a. (end)
