Harike■a: Bhagavad-g■t■ As It Is, Chapter Two, text 11. (leads chanting of verse, etc.)
Translation: "The Blessed Lord said: While speaking learned words, you are mourning for what is not
worthy of grief. Those who are wise lament neither for the living nor the dead."
Prabhup■da:
This is the version of K■■■a in the beginning of Bhagavad-g■t■. So first of all it is said here,
Vy■sadeva, the author . . . not author, the compiler who recorded the talks between K■■■a and
Arjuna and then put it systematically in a book form. So he says that bhagav■n uv■ca. Bhagav■n
means the Supreme Person. Just like in this meeting, amongst my students I am the supreme person,
similarly, in the state there is a supreme person—the president or the prime minister—so everywhere
you will find out one supreme person. Without a supreme person nothing can be managed, order-giving
person. This is everlastingly existing, and you cannot avoid this. Even in Communist country they also
have the supreme person, dictator. So taking the whole universal affair, the nature, how things are
going on . . . the sun is rising early in the morning. It is setting exactly in due time. Then the moon is
coming. Everyone in big, big planetary system, they are working very systematically. The astronomical
calculation is so perfect that, they say, one ten-thousandth part of a second is also calculated. So
accurately things are moving.
So in the Brahma-sa■hit■ it is said, yac cak■ur e■a savit■ sakala-grah■■■m (Bs. 5.52). The sun is
the eye of all the planets. We have got eyes, but unless there is sunrise, what is the value of our eyes?
We cannot see. We are very much proud of our eyes; we want to see everything. But we do not
calculate the value of our eyes. Unless there is sunshine, we cannot see. At night, unless there is
electricity or moonlight or some lamp, we cannot see. And still, we are very much proud of seeing. This
is called illusion. We have no power. We are put under certain condition, then we work. Otherwise we
cannot work. Prak■te■ kriyam■■■ni (BG 3.27). Prak■ti, material nature, puts us under certain
condition, and we work accordingly, not independently. And the prak■ti, material nature, also working
under somebody. Just like when you go on the street you see red light and green light. As soon as you
see red light you stop your car. So this red light and green light is being manipulated by the police, and
the police is working under government. Similarly, this whole material nature is acting like red light or
green light, but behind that red light and green light there is the supreme brain. That is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
So as a layman or as child cannot understand how the red light and blue light . . . green light is working
. . . he sees simply, he thinks automatically it is being done. That is foolishness. It is not being
automatically done. There is machine. There is manipulator behind this red light, this is intelligence.
Anyone who is concluding that, "On the street the red light and green light is working automatically;
there is no brain behind it," he's a rascal. Similarly, the whole material cosmic manifestation is working .
. . even the big sun planet, it is also working under certain direction. Yac cak■ur e■a savit■
sakala-grah■■■m. Without sunrise nobody can see, not only in this planet, in other planets also.
Sakala-grah■■■m.
So this sun planet is so important . . . day and night, year and millions of years—everything is being
calculated on the solar system. So this powerful planet is described as the eyes of everyone. Without
sunshine nobody can see. Yac cak■ur e■a savit■ sakala-grah■■■■ r■j■. It is to be considered as
the king of all planets, r■j■, sakala-grah■■■m. All the planets, they are moving, rotating on the heat of
the sun, heat and light, and they are working on the light of the sun. Sun is so important. Everything is
described in the Vedic literature. So that sun also—working under somebody's direction. Yasy■jñay■
bhramati sambh■ta-k■la-cakra■. The sun is rotating in the orbit at the speed of sixteen thousand miles
per second by the order of somebody. That is Govinda. Yasy■jñay■ bhramati sambh■ta-k■la-cakro
govindam ■di-puru■a■ tam aha■ bhaj■mi.
So this is knowledge. This is knowledge. So the Supreme Person is Bhagav■n. Bhaga means six kinds
of opulences: the richest, the most powerful, the wisest, the most beautiful and the most influential, and
the most renounced at the same time. Just like this whole cosmic manifestation is created by the will of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but you will not find Him here. Disinterested. Many millions of
universes are working by His will, but He is not interested. The example is just like a big capitalist. He
has got many factories, and if you go to the factory—there is a Tata factory, iron factory—you will find
huge factories going on, but Mr. Tata is not there. Things are going on. Similarly, all cosmic
manifestation going on, it is under the will of K■■■a. But He is not present here.
That is explained in the Bhagavad-g■t■, mat-sth■ni sarva-bh■t■ni (BG 9.4): "Everything is resting on
Me." Any factory, every worker knows that the whole factory function resting on that supreme person.
He knows that. So actually fact is that mat-sth■ni sarva-bh■t■ni n■ha■ te■u avasthita■: "But I am not
there. I am not there." Similarly, Bhagav■n means that. Under His will, under His power, everything is
working so nicely, systematically, but if you want to see God, K■■■a, you cannot see Him. He is not
there. He is in Goloka V■nd■vana. But His influence is so extensive that even without His personal
presence, things are going on so nicely. This is called Bhagav■n. Bhagav■n means this.
So here in this Bhagavad-g■t■, that Bhagav■n is giving you knowledge. So how much perfect it is, you
have to consider. Vy■sadeva could have said ■r■-vy■sadeva uv■ca. No. Bhagav■n uv■ca, so
authoritative. So whatever He says, there cannot be any change. It is all perfect. Unfortunately we
rascals, we do not take Bhagavad-g■t■ as it is. We want to change it according to our whims. This
rascal havoc has ruined the whole world. Otherwise, if they would have preached Bhagavad-g■t■ as it
is, the world situation would have been different. Everything would have been in order, tranquility,
peace, and everybody would have been prosperous. But the rascals will not do that. That is the defect.
Therefore our tiny effort is how to present Bhagavad-g■t■ as it is. This is our mission. If we take . . .
even now, in this distorted condition of the world, if we accept Bhagavad-g■t■ as it is, then still we will
be benefited. There is no doubt about it. Therefore our appeal is that throughout the whole world people
should come, try to understand Bhagavad-g■t■, and set up examples and do the needful. Then
everything will be peaceful. This is the peace formula. Bhokt■ra■ yajña-tapas■■
sarva-loka-mahe■varam, suh■da■ sarva-bh■t■nam (BG 5.29). Suh■da■ sarva-bh■t■nam. Suh■t
means well-wisher. Well-wisher. Here is the supreme well-wisher. He wants, K■■■a wants that
wherever you live, you live peacefully and happily; therefore He is called suh■t. He is desiring
everyone's happiness. Therefore He comes Himself to advise, to instruct how to live, how to follow His
instruction, and He leaves these behind Him such books as Bhagavad-g■t■, and He sends His
representative occasionally to revive our consciousness.
This business is going on, not only in the human society, even in the animal society. Anywhere, even in
demigod society, things are going on like that. Therefore we should know, whatever Bhagav■n says,
there cannot be any mistake, any illusion, any cheating or any imperfectness. Then it will be very nice.
And that is the fact. The word used, bhagav■n uv■ca, means this instruction is neither mistaken nor
illusion nor cheating nor imperfect. Whatever we teach, we speak, we conditioned soul . . . as I said,
that we are very much proud of our eyes, but we cannot see without sunrise . . . we cannot see without
electricity. But that is our defect. We are possessing everything defective, still we are proud, "We are
perfect." That is cheating. We are not perfect. But K■■■a, Bhagav■n, is not like that. If we think
K■■■a is also like us, avaj■nanti m■■ m■■h■ m■nu■■m . . . (BG 9.11). Because He teaches
exactly like a human being, He appears, therefore we think, "Oh, He may be little more intelligent than
me. After all, He is like me." No. He is Bhagav■n. We have to understand.
So the problem was that Arjuna was not willing to fight, considering his family members as not to be
killed. Nobody, of course, should like to kill his family members, so that was natural. But this family
relationship or national relationship, community relationship, this is due to this body. I accept somebody
as my brother because he has got the body from the same father from whom I have got this body. But
the body is by-product of the father's body. So this bodily relationship is material. Material means
outward, external. It is not real relationship. The father is a soul, I am soul, my brother is a soul, so we
are related on the spiritual platform in relationship with God because soul is not matter. Our material
father is . . . material father means we see the material body. We do not see the soul of the father,
neither the father sees the soul of the son. Everyone, under illusion, we are simply seeing the body and
accepting as kinsman.
So this illusion was to be removed by K■■■a, and therefore He said, a■ocy■n anva■ocas tvam (BG
2.11): "You are lamenting over the body. Oh, it is very regrettable. You are lamenting." A■ocy■n
anva■oca■. What is this body? It is simply lump of matter. As soon as the soul is out of this body, what
is the value of this lump of matter? It will be thrown in the street, and somebody will kick on the face.
Nobody will care. Nobody will care. But so long the soul is there, if you touch the hair even—"Why you
are touching my hair?" But when the soul is not there, on the same face, if somebody kicks, nobody will
care. This is the position of the body. Therefore it is said, a■ocy■n. "It is garbage. Why you are
lamenting on this garbage?" A■ocy■n anva■ocas tvam (BG 2.11). "You are talking, very learned man
that, 'If I kill my brothers the . . . my brothers' wives will be widow, and there will be prostitution, and
then the whole family will go to ruin.' These are all external condition."
He . . . this is real education, that "You are thinking on terms of the body; therefore it is not very
important subject matter." Real subject matter—what will happen to the soul—that is real, important.
But whole world, they do not know what is the important platform. All rascals, they are concerned with
this body. That is not wonderful, that is natural. Even if we know, still, if there is some bodily pain we
become very much disturbed. But we should know, always remember, that, "I am not this body." The
same example, that I have got a very nice car, Rolls-Royce car, I have got attachment, that is all right,
but we should know always that, "I am not this Rolls-Royce car. I am different from it." This is
knowledge. I may have some attachment for my car. That is natural. I have paid for it. I like it. But in
spite of all these consideration I am not the Rolls-Royce car. The Rolls-Royce car is a lump of matter. I
am using it. Similarly, we should always remember that "I am using this material body for my
transaction, different transaction, but I am not this material body."
But a devotee, he uses this material body, utilizes it properly. Just like we are also going by aeroplane,
by motorcar, but we have no concern with the . . . I have come to your country by aeroplane not to see
your country. I have come for K■■■a's business: to see if I can induce you to K■■■a consciousness.
Otherwise we have no concern with this aeroplane or motorcar or anything. We take advantage.
Similarly, when we take advantage of this body for advancing in K■■■a consciousness, then it is very
nice. Nirbandhe k■■■a-sambandhe (Brs. 1.2.255). That is also renouncement. He has no attachment,
he simply uses things. Then that thing becomes spiritual. Actually it is spiritual, and when it is not used
for spiritual purpose or K■■■a's purpose, it is material, the same thing. What is the difference between
material and spiritual? That is, a picture is there. There are so many pictures. People may say that,
"Here is the same picture. Why these people are worshiping and offering ■rati and chanting?" But this
picture is spiritual because it enhances or enthuses a spiritual consciousness. Therefore it is spiritual.
Of course, it is not very easy to understand immediately, but on the ultimate issue, everything is created
by K■■■a, or God, so by seeing everything, if you remember K■■■a, then that is spiritual. That is
spiritual.
So anyway, for ordinary man this does not happen. Therefore K■■■a says that, "You are lamenting for
the body. Oh, it is very astonishing. And you are talking like a very learned man." Everyone you will find
talking, very learned man. He knows something, but ask him, "What you are?" "I am Indian," "I am
American," "I am Mr. Such-and-such," "I am father of such and such." This is bodily. However great he
may be, he is identified with the body. And according to ■■stra, so long we shall identify with this body,
we are no better than the cats and dogs, because they also identify with the body. Therefore K■■■a
says, a■ocy■n anva■ocas tva■ prajñ■-v■d■■■ ca bh■■ase (BG 2.11). "Why? I am wrong?" Yes.
Because gat■s■n agat■s■■■ ca. The body, whether with the soul or without the soul, it is material.
So, so long even the soul is there, we should not be very much interested with the bodily comforts. We
should be interested how to make progress in spiritual consciousness. And general people, they are
simply engaged to get bodily comforts. The whole world is going on, the material civilization means
bodily comfort. They are increasing their activities how to . . . they take it as civilization that to increase
the bodily comforts of life. That is their idea. But they do not know that even if we are able to increase to
the largest extent our bodily comfort, the body will not exist. It will die. But we do not see to that, that
"Never mind we shall die. So long we live . . ." Y■vad j■vet sukha■ j■vet (C■rv■ka Muni). "So long we
live, let us live very happily."
So it is a great science. They do not know that . . . you may think that you are living very happily, but
you have to change this body, and that body may not be very happy. That they do not know. This is
ignorance, moha. Mohita■ n■bhij■n■ti (BG 7.13). Being bewildered by the three modes of material
nature, they do not know what is the actual fact. Therefore we have to learn from the perfect person,
K■■■a, what is this position. Here it is said that a■ocy■n anva■ocas tva■ prajñ■-v■d■■■ ca
bh■■ase gat■s■n agat■s■■■ ca n■nu . . . (BG 2.11) "This is not the subject matter of eulogizing or
lamenting. The subject matter should be different. That is soul." Then He will explain, next verse.
Thank you very much.
Devotees: Haribol! (end)
