Pradyumna: O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo bhagavate v■sudev■ya. O■ namo
bhagavate v■sudev■ya. (leads chanting of verse) (Prabhup■da and devotees repeat)
(break)
■r■ bhagav■n uv■ca—the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; kuta■—wherefrom; tv■—unto you;
ka■malam—dirtiness; idam—this lamentation; vi■ame—this hour of crisis; samupasthitam—arrived;
an■rya—persons who do not know the value of life; ju■■am—practiced by; asvargyam—that which
does not lead to higher planets; ak■rti—infamy; karam—the cause of; arjuna—O Arjuna.
Translation: "The Supreme Person, Bhagav■n, said: My dear Arjuna, how have these impurities come
upon you? They are not at all befitting a man who knows the progressive values of life. They do not
lead to higher planets, but to infamy."
Prabhup■da: So in this verse Vy■sadeva is writing. Of course, the . . . the speaking is through
Sañjaya, but the original writer is Vy■sadeva. In other ■lokas he writes arjuna uv■ca, sañjaya uv■ca,
like that. Similarly, he could write here k■■■a uv■ca. He could write. No. He's writing bhagav■n
uv■ca. So K■■■a is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. By this writing it is established,
■r■-bhagav■n uv■ca. He cannot be equal with Arjuna or Sañjaya or anybody else. Asammaurdhva.
Bhagav■n, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is supreme. Nobody is equal to Him, nobody is
higher than. Everyone is lower. That is the meaning of Bhagav■n. Nobody can claim, "I am
Bhagav■n." But nowadays there are so many rascals, they are claiming that everyone is Bhagav■n.
So Vy■sadeva is mistaken? Actually, these M■y■v■d■ philosophers, they are so great rascals they
sometimes say like that, that Vy■sadeva is also mistaken. They have got the audacity to say
Vy■sadeva . . . He is accepted as incarnation of N■r■ya■a, who has given us the Vedic literature, so
many books he has given: the Vedas, thePur■■as, the Mah■bh■rata, ■r■mad-Bh■gavatam,
Ved■nta-s■tra. Everything is given by Vy■sadeva in writing, and he's accepted, N■r■ya■a,
incarnation of N■r■ya■a, mah■muni-k■te. He is also Vy■sa-muni, but He is also mah■muni-k■te.
So there cannot be any mistake in the words of Vy■sadeva. This is the difficulty. If one does not come
through the channel of disciplic succession, so they are in so many ways mistaken. Vy■sadeva is
above all this. He is not an ordinary writer, for material description, for material name and faith. He
cannot be mistaken. As Bhagav■n, K■■■a cannot be mistaken, similarly Vy■sadeva, incarnation of
Bhagav■n, he also cannot be mistaken. Neither devotee of K■■■a can be mistaken. Devotee of
K■■■a, he does not say anything as his own opinion. He never says. What K■■■a says, he says. He
may be not perfect, but what K■■■a has said, that is perfect. Therefore a pure devotee, who does not
say anything beyond which was spoken by K■■■a, therefore his statement is also without mistake.
Common man within this material world, he commits mistake: "To err is human." Even big, big
personalities, they commit mistake. But n■r■ya■a para■. He is transcendental. K■■■a is
transcendental. There cannot be any mistake; there cannot be any illusion. Those who are within this
material world, they have got four defects: they commit mistake, they are illusioned, and their senses
are imperfect—bhrama, pram■da, vipralips■—and they're cheaters. Because . . . just like modern-day
scientists and philosophers, they propagate so many branches of knowledge, but when, on the crucial
point, they are caught, they say: "I, I do not know perfectly. I do not know perfectly. We are trying to
know. In future, we shall tell you the perfect." But if you are not in perfect knowledge, why should you
take the post of a teacher? If your knowledge is imperfect, then whatever you speak, that is imperfect.
Therefore with imperfect knowledge, why you should become a teacher? That is cheating. That is
cheating.
Therefore purposefully Vy■sadeva is writing sri-bhagav■n uv■ca: where there is no cheating, no
imperfection, no illusion, no mistake. Four things: no mistake, no illusion, no cheating and no
imperfection. This is Bhagav■n. Why we are taking Bhagavad-g■t■ so seriously? There are so many
other books we can read, so many theories, so many philosophers, big, big philosophers. But we
cannot take them, because they are defective. The author is sure to commit mistake. He is illusioned.
Because his senses are not perfect, therefore imperfection. So with all these defects, we cannot accept
anyone's knowledge.
This is Vedic process. This is called parampar■ system, disciplic succession. We receive knowledge
perfectly from the Supreme Bhagav■n. And if I receive the knowledge from Bhagav■n, and if I
distribute the same knowledge as Bhagav■n has said, without any interpretation of my cheating policy,
then the knowledge which I distribute, that is also perfect. I may not be perfect, but the knowledge
which I have taken from K■■■a, if I present it as it is, without any interpretation, then what I give you,
that is perfect. It is very easy to understand. I have given several times . . . just like a peon has brought
a money order for you, thousand dollars. So he's giving you. So you cannot say: "Oh, here is a peon.
He's a poor man. How he can give me one thousand dollars?" He's not giving; the money is sent by
somebody else. He's simply handing you over.
Therefore Caitanya Mah■prabhu says, ■m■ra ■jñ■ya guru haya t■ra sarva-de■a, t■ra ei de■a (CC
Madhya 7.128). He's asking everyone to become a spiritual master. So how everyone can become
spiritual master? A spiritual master must have sufficient knowledge, so many other qualification. No.
Even without any qualification one can become a spiritual master. How? Now the process is, Caitanya
Mah■prabhu says, ■m■ra ■jñ■ya: "On My order." That is the crucial point. One does not become
spiritual master by his own whims. That is not spiritual master. He must be ordered by superior
authority. Then he's spiritual master. ■m■ra ■jñ■ya.
Just like in our case. Our superior authority, our spiritual master, he ordered me that, "You just try to
preach this gospel, whatever you have learned from me, in English." So we have tried it. That's all. It is
not that I am very much qualified. The only qualification is that I have tried to execute the order of
superior authority. That's all. This is the secret of success.
Bahu-■■kh■ hy anant■■ ca. Vyavas■y■tmik■-buddhi■, ni■cay■tmik■-buddhi■. If one has got
unflinching faith in K■■■a and guru, guru-k■■■a-k■p■ya . . . (CC Madhya 19.151). We have to
receive mercy both from the spiritual master and K■■■a. We cannot jump over to K■■■a. That is
another nonsense. We must approach K■■■a through guru. That is parampar■ system. K■■■a is not
so cheap thing that you can jump over. Somebody says: "Oh, why shall I accept guru? I can approach
K■■■a directly." No. K■■■a does not accept such . . . mad-bhakta■ p■j■bhyadhika■. K■■■a says
that, "First of all you become devotee of My devotee." Caitanya Mah■prabhu says, gop■-bhartu■
pada-kamalayor d■sa-d■sa-d■s■nud■sa■ (CC Madhya 13.80): "I am the servant of the servant of
the servant of K■■■a." This is called parampar■ system.
You have to learn how to become servant of the servant of K■■■a. The more you become in the lower
position—servant, servant, servant, servant, servant, hundred times servant's servant—then more you
are advanced. Here in this material world everyone is trying to be master of the master. Just opposite.
And the spiritual world, the endeavor is to become servant's servant. This is the secret.
This is Vedic instruction.
So Vi■van■tha Cakravart■ ■h■kura, in connection with the verse vyavas■y■tmik■-buddhir ekeha
kuru-nandana . . . (BG 2.41). Ni■cay■tmik■-buddhi■. So Vi■van■tha Cakravart■ ■h■kura says that,
"The instruction which I have received from my spiritual master, that is my life and soul." This is called
ni■cay■tmik■-buddhi■, means assurance: "Whatever I have received, the order from my spiritual
master, that will give me salvation." Or even no salvation. It doesn't matter. A real devotee, a servant,
does not expect anything, but k■ryam: "It is my duty. It is my duty." If one takes in such spirit . . .
An■■rita■ karma-phala■ k■rya■ karma karoti y■ (BG 6.1). K■ryam. K■ryam means "It is my duty. It
must be done. That's my duty." Without any result. An■■rita-karma-phala■. Karma-phala■. Every
action, there is a result. Bad or good, it doesn't matter, there must be some result. So an■■rita■
karma-phala■. Don't take shelter of the result of your work. Generally we work: if the result is very
good, then we like to work; if the result is not very good, then we don't like to work. But a devotee
should not take . . .
(aside) Why you are moving so fast?
Devotee: I have got difficulty with my body. So I stand . . .
Prabhup■da: So by moving you shall be cured?
Devotee: Well . . . I'm sorry.
Prabhup■da: An■■rita■ karma-phala■ k■rya■ karma karoti ya■ (BG 6.1). Do not take shelter of your
result of your activities. You must take it as duty. He is sanny■s■. An■■rita■ karma-phala■ k■rya■
karma karoti ya■, sa sanny■s■. He's actually sanny■s■. A sanny■s■ does not become simply by
changing dress. No. Sanny■s■ means he's to work for K■■■a, without taking shelter of the result. It
doesn't matter. "K■■■a has ordered, and K■■■a's representative has ordered. Therefore I have to do
it." K■rya■ karma karoti ya■, sa sanny■s■.
So here, bhagav■n uv■ca. Vy■sadeva does not say that k■■■a uv■ca. If, if he would have said
"K■■■a," then people would have misunderstood. He's directly speaking, bhagav■n uv■ca, "the
Supreme Personality of Godhead." So anyone who is impersonalist, how he can understand
Bhagavad-g■t■? Bhagav■n means person. Bhagav■n is not imperson. The Absolute Truth is
manifested in three features: Brahman, Param■tm■, Bhagav■n. Brahman is the beginning,
impersonal. Sarva■ ida■ khalu brahma. Because . . . just like fire. Fire is burning somewhere, but its
heat and light is impersonal. Suppose here is big fire. Just like we got fireplace. That is in one corner.
But the whole room you are feeling heat. That heat is impersonal. But the fireplace, where there is
blazing fire, that is personal.
So impersonal conception is the offshoot of the person. That will be explained in the Thirteenth
Chapter: may■ tatam ida■ sarvam (BG 9.4). K■■■a says that, "Everyone . . . everywhere I am
spread. I exist everywhere." How does He exist? By His energy. That energy is impersonal. But the
Supreme Person, He's not impersonal. He's person. Therefore it is said, ■r■-bhagav■n uv■ca.
Bhagav■n means who is full with six kinds of opulence, ai■varya: the richest, the most famous, the
most learned, the most beautiful, the most strong and the most renouncer. He's Bhagav■n.
So Bhagav■n is the ultimate understanding of the Absolute Truth. Just like when you feel temperature .
. . just like we feel temperature from the sunshine, heat. And light. The sun is giving heat and light.
Everyone can . . . we enjoy the light and heat. But if you trace wherefrom this heat and light is coming,
then you go to the sun planet. That is localized. That is not impersonal. And again, if you enter into the
sun planet, then you will see the sun-god, Vivasvan. So we should not conclude final simply by heat
and light. So Brahman understanding, impersonal understanding of the Absolute Truth, is imperfect
understanding, partial understanding. It is not full understanding. Full understanding is Bhagav■n.
Therefore it is stated here, ■r■-bhagav■n uv■ca. There cannot be any mistake. That is final.
So Bhagav■n is criticizing. Arjuna became a very good man: "Why shall I . . .? Oh, I cannot kill my
kinsmen." From material point of view, people will very much appreciate, "Oh, here is Arjuna. He's so
nice, nonviolent. He is foregoing his claim. He has given up his astra, bow and arrows. He's no, no
longer fighting. He has decided not to fight with kinsmen, kill his own men." So from material point of
view, Arjuna is supposed to be very, very good man. But the Supreme Person, K■■■a, what does He
say? An■rya-ju■■am: "You rascal, you are speaking like an■rya." He'll say "rascal" later on. He posed
himself to be very good man, but when he comes to the test of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
He refuses to accept him as a good man. He's saying that, "You are an■rya."
There are two kinds of men: an■rya and ■rya. ■ryan. ■ryan means advanced in knowledge. He's
called ■ryan. And an■rya means uncivilized. So immediately He rebukes him, an■rya-ju■■am: "You
are talking just like non-■ryan, uncivilized person." People are very much, nowadays, eager how to
stop war. But K■■■a says . . . (break) . . . at any case is not required. There is necessity of war. Just
like He's trying to convince Arjuna. Our war means . . . according to Vedic civilization, that is
dharma-yuddha, religious fight. When the actual need is there to fight, we must fight. Not that when
there is need of fight, one becomes nonviolent.
Just like yesterday in the evening, when we were talking with Dr. Schumacher, so they were supporting
that "Why should you kill any animal who is coming to . . . if you are determined not to kill . . ." We were
talking of not killing, that why should you kill one animal who is coming to attack? No. You must kill.
That is necessity. You should not go to the forest to find out some living entities, living beings, to kill.
That is not your business. That is hi■sa. But if a tiger comes to attack you, you must kill. That is
self-defense. And that is not hi■sa.
So a devotee knows, a K■■■a conscious person knows when to kill and when not to kill. But it is not
that because we accept not killing, therefore in every case killing should be stopped. No. If there is
necessity, killing should be accepted. Therefore Arjuna decided not to kill, not to fight. And K■■■a
says that, "This is an■rya-ju■■am. This kind of decision is made by the uncivilized rascal."
An■rya-ju■■am asvargyam ak■rti-karam (BG 2.2). So many things He says. Asvargyam. Because the
aim of human life should be to make progress. That is called ■rya, progressive march.
Now we have got this human form of body, progressing from the lowest species of life in aquatics, then
trees, plants, insects, birds, beasts, 8,400,000 . . . now I have got this civilized form of body. Then the . .
. my endeavor should be how to make further progress. The further progress is described in the
Bhagavad-g■t■, that you can go to the higher planetary system. ■rdhva■ gacchanti sattva-sth■■ (BG
14.18). ■rdhvam, higher planetary system.
Madhye ti■■hanti r■jasa■. Madhye, in the middle planetary system, those who are contaminated with
the passion quality, they remain. And jaghanya-gu■a-v■tti-sth■ adho gacchanti t■masa■: and those
who are miscreants, jaghanya-gu■a-v■tti-sth■■, most hatefully accustomed, these hatefully
accustomed, illicit sex, meat-eating, gambling, intoxication . . . these are habits of hateful nature. So
jaghanya-gu■a-v■tti-sth■■ adho gacchanti t■masa■, they go down. Either become animals or . . .
there are seven kinds of lower planetary systems: tala, atala, nitala, p■tala, tal■tala, ras■tala, like that.
So ■rya means must make progress. An■rya means one who does not know what is progress of life.
They think there is no life after death. "So I have got this life now. Let me enjoy my senses to the best
capacity." This is an■rya, demon. "Eat, drink, be merry and enjoy." Because as soon as the body will
be finished, the senses also will be finished. Now let me use the senses. So an■rya, they do not know
that there is life after death. They think that as soon as . . .
(break) Big, big professors, in Europe, they say like that, "After death, everything is finished." C■rvaka
Muni's theory. This kind of theory was accepted long, long ago in the Vedic culture. Not accepted; was
heard. Never it was accepted. C■rvaka theory. C■rvaka theory was atheist. He was not . . .
(break) So his philosophy was atheistic philosophy. He used to say that bha■mi bh■tasya dehasya
kuto punar ■gama■, means bodily concept of life, talking of this body, deha, that it is burned into
ashes. So he used to say, "When the body is burned into ashes, then where is the chance of coming
back?" That means he had no information of the soul.
(break) . . . accepted by the Vedic civilization. The an■rya . . . (break) The ■ryan theory is that what is
next life, what is next life—progressive. That is ■rya. Civilized man. They may think like that, "But you
are belonging to the ■ryan family, P■■■ava family. Ak■rti-karam. You are celebrated as K■■■a's
friend. (break) So people will say that 'K■■■a's friend, he's not fighting.' "
Therefore ak■rti-karam, reputation defamation it is. "Don't do this." And He says, kuta■-ka■malam
ida■ vi■ame samupasthitam. "And in this, at this time of danger . . . there is fighting; you have to fight."
And vi■ame: "At this time of danger, you are so much bewildered that you given up your weapons
down. And now you promise that, 'No, I shall not fight.' " So immediately Arjuna was condemned.
Therefore the so-called good men of this world, who are engaged in so many welfare activities,
humanitarian activities, by mental concoction, they may be all foolish activities in the estimation of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. They are very much puffed up that, "We are doing this, opening
hospital and school, and philanthropism, nationalism." Is there any such thing in the Bhagavad-g■t■?
Is there any advice that, "You open hospital, school and do this philanthropic work"? No.
If you have got anything to give in charity, you are charitably disposed, K■■■a says: "Give it to Me. If
you are so rich and if you have got this good intention to give in charity, give it to Me." Yat karo■i yaj
juhosi yad a■n■si yat tapasyasi dad■si yat (BG 9.27). Dad■si yat means "Whatever you give in
charity." Kuru■va tad mad-arpanam: "Give it to Me. Yes, I am expanding My hand. Come on." But they
have forgotten K■■■a or K■■■a's advice, and they remain puffed up that, "I am engaged in this
activity, that activity, this activity."
Thousands of millions of such activities may be very good in the estimations of the fools and rascals,
but it may not be accepted by K■■■a. That is the crucial point. But our point is that unless accepted by
K■■■a, it is simply ■rama eva hi kevalam (SB 1.2.8), simply waste of time. Our philosophy says. We
have to satisfy K■■■a. We haven't got to satisfy ourself, that "I am doing very nice work in this way."
So all these people, they are manufacturing concocted ideas. Mano-rathena asato dhavato bahi■. By
mental concoction. Har■v abhaktasya kuto mahad-gu■■ mano-rathena ■sato dh■vato bahi■ (SB
5.18.12). One who is not K■■■a conscious, not devotee of K■■■a, he has no good qualification. "No,
he's a very big man. He has opened such big, big hospitals, big, big schools, big, big, big . . ." Yes, that
may be good from the material estimation, but because he's not a devotee of K■■■a, these are not
good qualifications.
Har■v a . . . this one word: Har■v abhaktasya, har■v abhaktasya. If one has no devotion to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, he cannot have any good qualities. These are not good qualities.
Actually that is so. Suppose if you, the . . . according to karma-k■■■a vic■ra, if you open a school, so
in the next time, you will have good education. It is pious activities from material point of view. So the
benefit will be that you will have good education in your next life. Accepting that it is very nice, next life I
shall be very learned scholar, but to become that learned scholar I'll have to take my birth. But he does
not know that how much difficulties are there to take birth.
K■■■a says, janma-m■tyu-jar■-vy■dhi-du■kha-do■■nu-dar■anam (BG 13.9). One should see to
the du■kha, unhappiness, on account of birth and death. So suppose you will get next life in the
heavenly planet, or you shall become very rich man, or you shall become very learned man, but you
have to go through these distresses, janma. They do not consider this.
Janma-m■tyu-jar■-vy■dhi-du■kha-do■■nu-dar . . . those who are actually learned, they, they should
know that, "Why shall I go again in the process of birth and death?" We have forgotten how much
difficulty it is, how much troublesome it is, how much distress it is to remain in the womb of the mother
for taking birth again. That we have forgotten. Therefore this kind of conclusion is not very intelligent
conclusion. The intelligent conclusion is: tyaktv■ deha■ punar janma naiti (BG 4.9). That is intelligent.
After giving up this body, no more coming to material world. That is intelligence.
So how many people do understand this intelligence? And where is the teaching? Therefore one who is
not devotee, he has no good qualifications. If he's still under the distresses of this material world, that is
not very intelligent question. Therefore K■■■a says, bah■n■m janman■m ante jñ■nav■n (BG 7.19).
Jñ■nav■n means intelligent, wise. What does he do? Bah■n■■ janman■m ante jñ■nav■n ma■
prapadyate. He surrenders to K■■■a. This is intelligence. This is wisdom.
So here also, the same thing. K■■■a has already expressed that, "You must fight." But he is showing
himself as very good man, nonviolent—"I shall not kill. I shall not do this. I shall not do this." So
immediately K■■■a very strongly criticizing him that "You are talking just like an■rya, not civilized
man." K■■■a, still He has not used very strong words. He has simply mildly rebuked his doing to
Arjuna that "You are not talking just like a intelligent man or advanced in civilization. You are talking like
uncivilized man." An■rya-ju■■am.
So these things are there in the Bhagavad-g■t■. We may be very much puffed up by our mental
concoction that, "I am doing very nice work," but it may not be accepted by God. It may not be accepted
by K■■■a. You may concoct. And naturally, one who is not guided by K■■■a, one who is not guided
by the K■■■a's representative, he's fool. He must be misguided. He must be misguided. An■rya.
■rya, an■rya, yes. Therefore we have to take shelter of K■■■a through His representative so that we
may become ■rya. ■rya, ■ryan. ■ryan civilization means being guided by the Supreme Person, Vedic
culture. That is called ■ryan civilization, Vedic culture. And what is the purpose of Vedas? Vedai■ ca
sarvair aham eva vedyam (BG 15.15).
Therefore the ultimate goal of civilization should be, ■ryan civilization, progressive civilization, how to
understand K■■■a. That is perfect civilization. And K■■■a . . . everything minus K■■■a, that is not
civilization. This is an■rya-ju■■am asvargyam ak■rti-karam (BG 2.2). We should not waste our time in
such thing which is devoid of K■■■a consciousness. This is first-class civilization.
Thank you very much.
Devotees: Haribol . . . (end)
