Pradyumna: (leads chanting of verse) (Prabhup■da and devotees repeat)
(break)
klaibyam—impotence; m■—do not; sma—take it for granted; gama■—go in; p■rtha—O son of P■th■;
na—never; etat—like this; tvayi—unto you; upapadyate—is befitting; k■udram—very little;
h■daya—heart; daurbalyam—weakness; tyaktv■—giving up; utti■■ha—get up; parantapa—O
chastiser of the enemies.
Translation: "O son of P■th■, do not yield to this degrading impotence. It does not become you. Give
up such petty weakness of heart and arise, O chastiser of the enemy."
Prabhup■da: So Bhagav■n, K■■■a, is encouraging, k■■dra■ h■daya-daurbalyam. "For a k■atriya
to speak like that, 'No, no, I cannot kill my kinsmen. I am giving my weapons,' this is weakness,
cowardice. Why you are all this nonsense doing?" K■■dra■ h■daya-daurbalyam. "This kind of
compassion, giving up your duty as a k■atriya, it is simply weakness of the heart. It has no meaning."
Klaibya■ ma sma gama■ p■rtha naitat tvayy upapadyate. "Especially for you. You are My friend. What
people will say? So give up this weakness of the heart and utti■■ha, stand up, take courage."
So just see how K■■■a is inducing Arjuna to fight. People are very much ignorant, and they
sometimes criticize that, "K■■■a is exciting Arjuna. He is very gentleman, nonviolent, and K■■■a is
exciting him to fight." This is called ja■a-dar■ana. Ja■a-dar■ana. Ja■a-dar■ana means material
vision. Therefore ■■stra says, ata■ ■r■-k■■■a-n■m■di na bhaved gr■hyam indriyai■ (CC Madhya
17.136). ■r■-k■■■a-n■m■di.
We become in touch with K■■■a by chanting His name, Hare K■■■a. That is the beginning of our
connection with K■■■a. N■m■di. So ■■stra says, ata■ ■r■-k■■■a-n■m■di. ■di means beginning.
So we have no connection with K■■■a. But if we chant Hare K■■■a mah■-mantra, immediately our
first chance to contact K■■■a begins. So it has to be practiced. Not that immediately I realize K■■■a.
That is not . . . of course, if one is advanced, it is possible immediately.
So ■r■-k■■■a-n■m■di. N■ma means name. So K■■■a is not only name. ■di, that is the beginning,
but form, activities. Just like ■ravana■ k■rtanam (SB 7.5.23). So ■ravana■ k■rtanam, glorifying or
describing about K■■■a . . . so He has got His form. So n■ma means name, and then r■pa means
form. N■ma, r■pa . . . l■l■ means pastimes; gu■a means quality; entourage, His associates; all these
. . . ata■ ■r■-k■■■a-n■m■di na bhaved (CC Madhya 17.136). Na bhaved gr■hyam indriyai■. By
ordinary senses we cannot understand, either ■r■ K■■■a's name . . .
We are hearing our . . . through the aural reception, K■■■a's name, but if we keep our ear without
purification . . . of course, by hearing, it will be purified. We have to help. Help means to avoid the
offenses, ten kinds of offenses. So in this way we shall help the purificatory process. Just like if I want
to ignite fire, so I must help the igniting process by drying the wood. It will very soon get fire. Similarly,
simply chanting, that will help us. So it will take time. But if we avoid the offenses, then it will be very
quickly purified. The action will be there. So ata■ ■r■-k■■■a-n■m■di na bhaved gr■hyam indriyai■
(CC Madhya 17.136).
So this behavior of K■■■a, how ordinary men can understand? Because they have got their ordinary
senses, therefore they mistake. Why K■■■a? Even K■■■a's devotee, Vai■■ava. That is also stated:
vai■■avera kriy■ m■dra vijñeha n■ bujhaya (CC Madhya 23.39). Even a Vai■■ava ■c■rya, what he
is doing, even the most expert intelligent man cannot understand why he is doing this. Therefore we
should not try to imitate the higher authorities, but we have to follow the order, injunction, given by the
higher authorities.
It is not possible . . . K■■■a is exciting Arjuna to fight. That does not mean we can also do that, excite.
No. That will be immoral. For K■■■a it is not immoral. Whatever He is doing . . . God is good. He is
all-good. We should accept it. Whatever He is doing, that is all-good. This is one side. And whatever I
am doing without authority's order, this is all bad. He does not require any order from anyone else.
■■vara■ parama■ k■■■a■ (Bs. 5.1). He is the supreme controller. He does not require anyone's
instruction. Whatever He does, it is perfect. This is K■■■a understanding. And not that I have to study
K■■■a in my own way. K■■■a is not subjected to your examination or your test. He is above all. He is
transcendental. Therefore those who have not the transcendental vision, they misunderstand K■■■a.
Here He is directly enticing:
Parantapa is, this word, very word, is used that "You are a k■atriya, you are king. Your business is to
chastise the mischief-mongers. That is your business. You cannot excuse the mischief-monger."
Formerly, the kings were so . . . the king himself used to judge. A criminal was brought before the king,
and if the king thought it wise, he would take his own sword, immediately cut his head. That was the
duty of king. Even not many . . . about hundred years ago in Kashmir, the king, as soon as a thief was
caught, he would be brought before the king, and if he is proved that he was a thief, he has stolen,
immediately the king will cut off his hands personally, chopped off. Even hundred years ago. So all
other thieves warned, "This is your punishment."
So there was no thieving. There was no stealing, no burglary in Kashmir. Even somebody lost
something on the road, it will lie down. Nobody will touch it. The order was, king's order was, "If
something is lying down on the street uncared for, you cannot touch it. The man who has left it, he
would come; he will collect. You cannot touch." Even hundred years ago. So this capital punishment is
required. Nowadays the capital punishment is excused.
Murderers are not hanged. This is all mistake, all rascaldom. A murderer must be killed. No mercy. Why
a human killer? Even an animal killer should be immediately hanged. That is the kingdom. The king
should be so strict. So this sympathy is like Arjuna's sympathy. The sympathy . . . now the state is
sympathizing with the murderer not to be killed. This is Arjuna's. That is h■daya-daurbalyam. That is
not duty. One has to discharge the duty ordered by the superior authority very strictly, without any
consideration.
So these are weakness of the heart, this kind of sympathy. But ordinary person will not understand.
Therefore to understand K■■■a, one requires special senses, special senses, not ordinary senses.
Special senses means you have to pluck your eyes and you have to put another eyes? No. You have to
purify. Tat-paratvena nirmalam (CC Madhya 19.170). Just like if you have got some disease in the
eyes, you apply medicine, and when it is clear, you can see clearly everything; similarly, with these
blunt senses, we cannot understand what is K■■■a.
Sevonmukhe hi jihv■dau svayam eva sphuraty ada■ (Brs. 1.2.234). As ■r■ K■■■a's n■m■dau,
K■■■a's name, form, quality, etc., is not understood by these blunt senses, so how it is to be done?
Now, sevonmukhe hi jihv■dau. Again jihv■dau: beginning from the tongue, controlling the tongue. Just
see. It is something peculiar, that you have to understand K■■■a by controlling the tongue? This is
something wonderful. How is that? I have to control my tongue to understand K■■■a? But it is, the
■■stra injunction is there: sevonmukhe hi jihv■dau. Jihv■ means tongue.
So in order to see K■■■a, in order to understand K■■■a, the first business is to control your tongue.
Therefore we say don't take meat, don't take liquor. Because it is controlling the tongue. The tongue is
the most strong enemy as sense, as perverted sense. And these rascals, they say: "No, you can eat
whatever you like. It has nothing to do with religion." But Vedic ■■stra says, "You rascal, first of all
control your tongue. Then you can understand what is God."
So this is called Vedic injunction—perfect. If you control your tongue, then you control your belly, then
you control your genital. R■pa Gosv■m■ gives instruction:
This is instruction, that anyone who has become competent to control the tongue, to control the mind,
to control the anger, to control the belly and control the genital, if six kind of control is there, he is fit for
becoming spiritual master; he can make disciples all over the world. And if you cannot control your
tongue, if you (cannot) control your anger, control your mental concoction, then how you can become
even a spiritual master? That is not possible. P■thivi■ sa ■i■y■t. One who did . . . that is called
gosv■m■, gosv■m■ or sv■m■, master of the senses. Master of controlling these six kinds.
So beginning is the jihv■. Sevonmukhe hi jihv■dau svayam eva sphuraty ada■ (Brs. 1.2.234). Sev■.
The tongue can be engaged in the service of the Lord. How? You chant Hare K■■■a, always glorify.
V■c■■si vaiku■■ha-gu■■nuvar■ane (SB 9.4.18-20). V■c■■si, means talking. Talking is the
business of tongue, and tasting is the business of tongue. So you engage the tongue in the service of
the Lord by glorifying.
Whenever . . . you take a vow that "Whenever I shall speak, I shall simply speak, glorifying K■■■a,
nothing more." That is tongue control. If you don't allow your tongue to speak anything nonsense,
gr■mya-kath■ . . . we sometimes sit together, we talk so many nonsense. That should be controlled.
"Now I have engaged my tongue for the service of the Lord, so we shall not talk anything of sense
gratification." This is controlling the tongue. "I cannot eat anything which is not offered to K■■■a." This
is controlling the tongue.
So these are small techniques, but it has got great, great value, so that K■■■a will be pleased, the
austerity, and He will reveal. You cannot understand. You cannot see K■■■a. You cannot order
K■■■a, "K■■■a, please come, dancing with flute. I shall see You." This is order. K■■■a is not
subjected to your order. Therefore Caitanya Mah■prabhu gives us instruction, a■li■ya v■ p■da-rat■■
pinastu m■■ marma-hat■■ karotu v■ adar■anam (CC Antya 20.47). Adar■anam. Everyone wants to
see K■■■a, a devotee, but a pure devotee says that, "No, if You don't like to see me, that's all right.
You can break my heart. I may always pray to see You. But You do not come and break my heart, that
is also accepted. Still, I shall worship You." This is pure devotion. Not that, "I have asked K■■■a to
come before me dancing. He did not come. So I give up this nonsense. The K■■■a consciousness
movement is no value." Not like that.
This is R■dh■r■■■'s attitude. So K■■■a left V■nd■vana. All the gop■s, they passed their days
simply crying for K■■■a, but never condemned K■■■a. Whenever somebody came . . . K■■■a also
was thinking of them, because gop■s are the greatest devotees, topmost devotees. There is no
comparison with the devotion of the gop■s. Therefore K■■■a was always obliged to them. K■■■a
said to the gop■s that "You have to be satisfied with your own business. I cannot return you anything
for your love." K■■■a, the Supreme, the all-powerful, He was unable to repay the debts for the gop■s.
So gop■s . . . Caitanya Mah■prabhu said, ramy■ k■cid up■san■ vraja-vadhu-varge■a y■ kalpit■
(Caitanya-manjusa): there is no more better worship than what was conceived by the gop■s. So gop■s
are the topmost devotees. And amongst the gop■s, ■r■mat■ R■dh■r■■■ is the topmost. Therefore
■r■mat■ R■dh■r■■■ is greater than K■■■a. So this is Gau■■ya-Vai■■ava philosophy. It requires
time.
So the activities of K■■■a, the rascals, if they simply see that, "K■■■a is enticing Arjuna to fight;
therefore K■■■a is immoral," that is . . . means wrong vision. You have to see K■■■a with separate
eyes. Therefore K■■■a says in the Bhagavad-g■t■, janma karma me divya■ ca (BG 4.9). Divyam.
These transcendental activities of K■■■a, if anyone can understand, simply if anyone can understand,
then he becomes liberated immediately. Liberated. Not liberated ordinary liberation, but for going back
to home, back to Godhead. Tyaktv■ deha■ punar janma naiti m■m eti kaunteya (BG 4.9). The
greatest liberation.
There are different types of liberation also. S■yujya, s■r■pya, s■r■■i, s■lokya, s■yujya . . . (CC
Madhya 6.266). Five kinds of liberation. So s■yujya means to merge into the existence, Brahman,
brahma-laya. That is also liberation. The M■y■v■d■s or the jñ■n■-samprad■ya, they want to merge
into the existence, Brahman existence. That is also mukti. That is called s■yujya-mukti. But for a
devotee, this s■yujya-mukti is just like hell. Kaivalya■ narak■yate. So for Vai■■ava, kaivalyam, to . . .
monism, to merge into the existence of the Supreme, is compared with hell. Kaivalya■ narak■yate
tri-da■a-p■r ■k■■a-pu■p■yate (Caitanya-candr■m■ta 5). And the karm■s . . . jñ■n■s are anxious
to merge into the existence of the Brahman effulgence, and the karm■s, their highest aim is how to be
elevated in the higher planetary system, Svarga-loka, where Lord Indra is there, or Brahm■ is there.
That is karm■s' ambition, to go to the heaven. They all, except Vai■■ava philosophy, in all other
literature, all other scripture, means Christian and Muhammadan, their aim is how to be elevated to the
heaven.
So heaven is described in the Vedic literature as tri-da■a-p■ar. Tri-da■a-p■ra. Tri-da■a-p■ra means
there are 33,000,000's of demigods, and they have got their separate planets. This is called
tri-da■a-p■ra. Tri means three, and da■a means ten. So thirty-three or thirty. Anyway, tri-da■a-p■ra
■k■■a-pu■p■yate. ■k■■a-pu■pa means something imaginary. Something imaginary—a flower in
the sky. A flower should be in the garden, but if somebody imagines the flower in the sky, it is
something imaginary. So for a devotee, this heavenly promotion to the heavenly planet is just like a
flower in the sky. Tri-da■a-p■ra ■k■■a-pu■p■yate, kaivalya■ narak■yate. Jñ■n■ and karm■.
And durd■ntendriya-k■la-sarpa-pa■al■ protkh■ta-da■str■yate (Caitanya-candr■m■ta 5). Then
yog■. Yog■s are trying. Yog■ means yoga indriya-samyama, controlling the senses. That is yoga
practice. Our senses are very strong. Just like we also, Vai■■avas, we first of all try to control the
tongue. So yog■s also, they try to control the senses, not only tongue, but all other, ten kinds of
senses, by that yogic mystic process. So why they are trying to control? Because the senses are just
like serpents. A serpent . . .
Just like they touch anywhere, immediately something up to death. Injury there must be, up to death.
This is exemplified: just our sex impulse. As soon as there is illicit sex, there is so many difficulties. Of
course, nowadays it has all become very easy. Formerly it was very difficult, especially in India.
Therefore a young girl was always protected, because if she mixes with the boys, somehow or other, as
soon as there is sex, she becomes pregnant, and it will be no more possible to get her married. No.
Touched by the serpent. This is . . . Vedic civilization is very strict. Because the whole aim was how to
go back to home, back to Godhead, not sense gratification—eat, drink, be merry, enjoy. That is not the
aim of human life.
So everything was planned with that aim. Vi■■ur aradhyate.
Var■■■rama, these br■hma■a, k■atriya, vai■ya, everyone had to strictly follow the rules and
regulation of the particular division. A br■hma■a must act as a br■hma■a. A k■atriya must as . . .
here is the . . . just K■■■a says: "You are k■atriya; why you are talking all this rascal? You must!"
Naitat tvayy upapadyate (BG 2.3). "In two ways you should not do this. As a k■atriya you should not do
this, and as My friend, you should not do this. This is your weakness." So this is Vedic civilization.
Fight for the k■atriya. A br■hma■a is not going to fight. Br■hma■a is satya■ ■amo dama■, he is
practicing how to become truthful, how to become clean, how to control the senses, how control the
mind, how to become simple, how to become full cognizant of the Vedic literature, how to apply
practically in life, how to become firmly fixed up in conviction. These are br■hma■as'. Similarly,
k■atriya's—fighting. That is necessary. Vai■ya—k■■i-go-rak■ya-v■■■jyam (BG 18.44). So all these
strictly to be followed.
Just yesterday we were reading when Manu, Vaivasvatu Manu, came to Kardama Muni, he is
receiving, "Sir, I know that your touring means you are just . . ." what is called? What is called,
examining?
Devotee: Inspecting.
Prabhup■da: Inspecting, yes. Inspecting. "Your touring means inspection whether the var■■■rama,
whether the br■hma■a is doing actually as br■hma■a, k■atriya is doing actually as k■atriya." That is
king's touring. King's touring not a pleasure touring, at the expense of the state go somewhere and
come back. No. He was . . . sometimes in disguise the king used to see whether this
var■■■rama-dharma is being maintained, properly being observed, whether somebody is simply
wasting time like hippies. No. That cannot be done. That cannot be done.
Now in your government there is some inspection that nobody is employed, but unemployed. But so
many things are not practically inspected. But it is the duty of the government to see everything,
varn■■ram■caravat■, everything is practicing as br■hma■a. Simply by falsely becoming br■hma■a,
falsely becoming k■atriya—no. You must. So this was the king's duty, government's duty. Now
everything is topsy-turvied. Everything is no more practical value. Therefore Caitanya Mah■prabhu
said, kalau . . .
It is very difficult to take us back to the original process of civilization.
So for a Vai■■ava, as I was explaining, the tri-da■a-p■ra ■k■■a-pu■p■yate
durd■ntendriya-k■la-sarpa-pa■al■. So controlling the sense, that is durd■nta. Durd■nta means
formidable. It is very, very difficult to control the senses. Therefore the yoga process, mystic yoga
process—just to practice how to control the senses. But for a devotee, they . . . just like the tongue, if it
is engaged only in the business of chanting Hare K■■■a mantra and eating only K■■■a pras■dam,
the whole thing is done, perfect yog■. Perfect yog■.
So for a bhakta there is no trouble with the senses, because a bhakta knows how to engage each and
every sense in the service of the Lord. H■■■ke■a h■■■ke■a-sevanam (CC Madhya 19.170). That is
bhakti. H■■■ka means the senses. When the senses are engaged only for the service of K■■■a,
H■■■ke■a, then there is no need of practicing yoga. Automatically they are locked up in the service of
K■■■a. They have no other engagement. That is the highest. Therefore K■■■a says:
"A first-class yog■ is he who is always thinking of Me." Therefore this chanting of Hare K■■■a mantra,
if we simply chant and hear—the first-class yog■. So these are the process.
So K■■■a wants to Arjuna that, "Why you are indulging in this weakness of mind? You are under My
protection. I am ordering you to fight. Why you are denying?" This is the purport.
Thank you very much.
Devotees: All glories to Prab . . . (cut) (end)
